JP WEALES SCIENTIFIC TECHNICAL SERIES GWILT

WEALE’S SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL SERIES. CIVIL ENGINEERING & SURVEYING. Civil Engineering. H. Law & D. K. Clark . . 6/6 Pioneer Engineering. E. Dobson . . ... 4/6 Iron Bridges of Moderate Span. H. W. Pendred.  2/- Iron and Steel Bridges & Viaducts. F. Campin . 3/6 Constructional Steel & Ironwork. F. Campin . . 3/6 Tubular & Girder Bridges. G. D. Dempsey . . 2/- Materials and Construction. F. Campin . . . 3/- Sanitary Work. C. Slagg.3/- Roads &, Streets. Law, Clark, & Wallis-Tayler . 6/- Construction of Gasworks. S.Hughes&H.O’Connor  6/- Well-Sinking. J. G. Swindell & G. R. Burnell . . 2/- Drainage. G. D. Dempsey & D. K. Clark . . .4/6 Blasting and Quarrying. J. Burgoyne . . . 1/6 Foundations and Concrete Work. E. Dobson . 1/6 Pneumatics. C. Tomlinson.1/6 Surveying. T. Baker & F. E. Dixon . . .2/- MECHANICAL ENGINEERING, &c. Engineering Drawing. J. Maxton . ... 3/6 Fuels, Analysis and Valuation. H. J. Phillips . 2/- Fuel. C. W. Williams & D. K. Clark . . .3/6 Boilermaker’s Assistant. J. Courtney . . . 2/- Boilermaker’s Ready Reckoner. J. Courtney .  4/- Boilermaker’s Ready Reckoner and Assistant. . 7/- Steam Boilers. R. Armstrong.1/6 Steam and Machinery Management. M. P. Bale.  2/6 Steam and the Steam Engine. D. K. Clark . . 3/6 Steam Engine, Theory of. T. Baker . . . 1/6 Steam Engine. Dr. Lardner.1/6 Locomotive Engines. G. D. Dempsey & D. K. Clark .  3/- Locomotive Engine Driving. M. Reynolds . . 3/6 Stationary Engine Driving. M. Reynolds . . 3/6 Model Locomotive Engineer. M. Reynolds . . 3/6 Modern Workshop Practice. J. G. Winton . . 3/6 Mechanical Engineering. F. Campin . . . . 2/6 Details of Machinery. F. Campin . . . . 3/- Elementary Marine Engineering. J. S. Brewer . 1/6 CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON, 7, Stationers' Hall Court, E.C.

WEALE’S SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL SERIES. MECHANICAL ENGINEERING, &c ,—eontd. Power of Water. J. Glynn.2/- Mechanism and Machines. T. Baker & J. Nasmyth 2/6 Mechanics. C. Tomlinson.1/6 Cranes and Machinery. J. Glynn . . . . 1/6 Smithy and Forge. W. J. E. Crane . . .2/6 Sheet-Metal Worker’s Guide. W. J. E. Crane . . 1/6 Elementary Electric Lighting. A. A. C. Swinton . 1/6 MINING & METALLURGY. Mining Calculations. T. A. O’Donahue . . . 3/6 Mineralogy. A. Ramsay.3/6 Coal Mining. Sir W. W. Smyth & T. F. Brown . . 3/6 Metallurgy of Iron. H. Bauerman . . . .5/- Mineral Surveyor’s Guide. W. Lintern . . . 3/6 Slate and Slate Quarrying. D. C. Davies . . 3/- Mining and Quarrying. J. H. Collins . . . 1/6 Subterraneous Surveying. T. Fenwick & T. Baker 2/6 Mining Tools. W. Morgans.2/6 Plates to ditto. 4 to . 4/6 Physical Geology. Portlock & Tate . . . 2/- Historical Geology. R. Tate.2/6 The above 2 vols., bound together ....  4/6 Electro-Metallurgy. A. Watt.3/6 NAVIGATION, SHIPBUILDING, &c. Navigation. J. Greenwood & W. H. Rosser . . 2/6 Practical Navigation. Greenwood, Rosser k  Law . 7/- Navigation and Nautical Astronomy. J. R. Young  2/6 Mathematical & Nautical Tables. Law & Young .  4/- Masting and Rigging. R. Kipping . . . . 2/- Sails and Sailmaking. R. Kipping . . . . 2/6 Marine Engines. R. Murray & G. Carlisle . . 4/6 Naval Architecture. J. Peake.3/6 Ships, Construction of. H. A. Sommerfeldt . . 1/6 Plates to ditto. 4 to ..7/6 Ships and Boats. W. Bland . . . . .1/6 CROSBY LOCKWOOD &  SON, 7,  Stationers' Hall Court, E.C-

WEALE’S SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL SERIES. AGRICULTURE & GARDENING. Fertilisers & Feeding Stuffs. Dr. B. Dyer net  i/- Draining and Embanking. Prof. J. Scott . . 1/6 Irrigation and Water Supply. Prof. J. Scott . . 1/6 Farm Roads, Fences, and Gates. Prof. J. Scott . 1/6 Farm Buildings. Prof. J. Scott.2/- Barn Implements and Machines. Prof. J. Scott . 2/- Field Implements and Machines. Prof. J. Scott . 2/- Agricultural Surveying. Prof. J. Scott . . .1/6 The above 7 vols., bound together . . . . 12/- Farm Management. R. S. Burk . . . .2/6 Landed Estates Management. R. S. Burn . .  2/6 Farming—Soils, Manures, and Crops. R. S. Burn  2/- Farming—Outlines—Farming Economy. R.S.Burn  3/- Farming—Cattle, Sheep, and Horses. R. S. Burn  2/6 Farming—Dairy, Pigs, and Poultry. R. S. Burn . 2/- Farming—Sewage & Irrigation. R. S. Burn . . 2/6 The above 5 vols., bound together . . . . 12/- Book-keeping for Farmers. J. M. Woodman . 2/6 Ready Reckoner for Land. A. Arman . . . 2/- Miller’s & Farmer’s Ready Reckoner . . .2/- Hay and Straw Measurer. J. Steele . . . . 2/- Meat Production. J. Ewart.2/6 The Sheep. W. C. Spooner.3/6 Multum-in-Parvo Gardening. S. Wood . . . 1 /- Forcing Garden. S. Wood.3/6 Market and Kitchen Gardening. C. W. Shaw . 3/- Kitchen Gardening. G. M. F. Glenny. . . . 1/6 Cottage Gardening. E. Hobday . . . .1/6 Garden Receipts. C. W. Quin.1/6 Potatoes: How to Grow. J. Pink . . . .2/- Culture of Fruit Trees. M. Du Breuil . . .  3/6 Tree Planter & Plant Propagator. S. Wood . 2/- Tree Pruner. S. Wood.. . 1/6 Tree Planter, Propagator, & Pruner. S. Wood . 3/6 Grafting and Budding. C. Baltet . . . .2/6 Bees for Pleasure & Profit. G. G. Samson net  1/- CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON, 7, Stationers’ Hall Court, E.C.

THE ARCHITECTURE OF MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO, TRANSLATED BY JOSEPH GWILT.

LONDON: FEINTED BY GEOEGE PHIPPS, 13 & 14 , TOTHILL STEEET, •WESTMINSTEE.

THE ARCHITECTURE MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO IN TEN BOOKS TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN By JOSEPH GWILT, F.S.A., F.R.A.S. AUTHOR OF AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF ARCHITECTURE AND OTHER WORKS A NEAV EDITION CAREFULLY REVISED BY THE TRANSLATOR, AND WITH ADDITIONAL PLATES ' lumen LONDON LOCKWOOD & CO., 7, STATIONERS’ HALL COURT LUHGATE HILL 1874

mmM

CONTENTS, PAGE Publisher’s Preface ......  vii Preface . . . . . . . . ix Life of Vitruvius ......  xi List of the several Editions and Versions of Vitruvius . . xv List of the Chapters contained in the Work . . ■ . xxix Explanation of the Vignettes . . . . xxxv The Architecture of Vitruvius, Book I. . .1 „ „ „ Book II.29 „ „ „ Book III. . . .61 „ „ „ Book IV. . . . 79 „ „ „ Book V. . .99 „ „ „ Book VI. ... 127 „ „ „ Book VII. . . . 151 „ „ „ Book VIII. . . . 177 „ „ „ Book IX. . . . 201 „ „ „ Book X. . . . . 229 Plates, and Explanations of them ....  269 Index . . . . . . . . 297

g'miTZOD . - . , . • . . . . . , • 8« mnfrF/ sflkl ’■rnnYvf •?<>.«  rxMssr-V Xins’/sB’arfl 1o $%i .T . , ii'f-iW'Sti.l ni siotqi’,if3 sdi lo teiil . . .. gift »oft«H«fr£3fS[ . . .1 -J :••! ^ mvintfiT to ewh-odiffyii. '*«'? .TJMZH J7 3-0X1' .117 *.<■«& 3ur.il z 3o'»a ■xft lo  8^tir>aafqjc& Is xahal ‘■vaw r'y^c

PUBLISHER’S PREFACE. The principles of honour and integrity inculcated on the architect in the subjoined work would alone sanctify its prolonged use by the profession. “ The perusal,” says Milizia (speaking of Vitruvius), in his Lives of the Architects , “ of that part of his writings* in which he treats of the requisite qualities of an architect, should cause those to blush who pursue the profession solely for the purpose of profit, and who are guided by no other feeling than interest. Would that the lessons of our author might excite regret in such men, and induce them to follow it from motives of honour! ”f Some persons have thought that the value of the author’s treatise on architecture has been much overrated. One has gone even so far as to express an opinion that it might have even been better for the art had the work been buried in oblivion. Fortunately, the number of these eccentric beings is few and of small authority in the art. It seems, indeed, strange, if credit could be attached to their dicta, that no less than forty-three editions of the work should have appeared in various languages, some of them by men of great learning, and amongst them one by an architect of consummate taste and world-wide reputation: for such * Lib. i. cap. 1—Pref. lib. vi. f Mrs. Cresy’s Translation.

Vlll a person was the celebrated Perrault, whose facade of the Louvre is accounted one of the most elegant and magnificent examples of the art in existence. With such a precedent, there cannot be much apology necessary for the cheap copy now presented to the amateur and to the student of architecture. L. B. Alberti, Baldassare Peruzzi, Palladio, and all the illustrious restorers of the Art, treat Vitruvius as the great master from whom they derived the precepts delivered in their writings; and though perhaps a more utilitarian age has arrived, the sound doctrines of the art are unchangeable, for they are based on nature and statics. Of late we have had much talk of ^Esthetics in the fine arts; or, in plain language, of the doctrine of expedients for converting sense into sensation, as if some new discovery had been made. That this is no new thing, appears from the author’s directions on the Scamilli impares, as well as on many other matters of detail mentioned in the third book and elsewhere. It is also quite apparent, from the instructions for designing temples, that the laws of statics guided them to an equality of voids and solids. It only remains for me to thank the translator for his superintendence through the press of this edition, in which, though no material alterations have been necessary, a considerable number of corrections have been made, and to which three plates of theatres have been added. The present taste for a cheap press precluded another edition, except in the form here presented. J. W. 59, High Holborn,

PREFACE. The following translation was commenced many years since, under a conviction of the benefit I should derive from it in my architectural studies ; but at the time of undertaking it, its publication was not contemplated. During the progress of my labours I found it useful to refer to the different versions of the author, and more especially to that of Newton, the only Englishman who has hitherto translated and published the whole of the text of Vitruvius. That translation I found so unsatisfactory and incorrect, that my resolution was early formed of making an endeavour, at some period, to give the English student, not only a more convenient volume for reference, but, as I presume to think, a truer interpretation of the text of the author. Whether I have succeeded, must be submitted to the Reader’s judgment. I have, perhaps, adhered more closely to the text than the idiom of our language may allow, but I trust that this will be far from a serious charge against me. The editions chiefly used have been those of Philander, Elzevir, the Bipont, and that of Schneider, which is a most valuable book: not, however, without frequent recurrence to the translations of Barbaro and Perrault, and the excellent one of Galiani. The plates subjoined to the work are not so numerous as might have been desired. My reason for limiting them to their present number has been more from a desire to

avoid conjectural representations than to save trouble or expense in the publication. The following version is without note or comment, but I am in hope3 that it may, at a future period, lead to a further consideration of the precepts and doctrines of the only author, among the ancients, on the art of which I am an humble professor.

LIFE OF VITRUVIUS. The materials for a life of Vitruvius are only to be found in his own Treatise. Among the ancient authors he is merely mentioned by Pliny, as one of those writers from whom he compiled; and by Frontinus, in his Treatise on Aqueducts, as the first who introduced the Quinarian measure. Though practising in Rome, and in the service of the emperors, living in Rome, and writing the subjoined work in that city, there appears nothing that can lead us to assert that he was a native of the place. Maffei, a Veronese, strove to prove the author his countryman, and in corroboration adduced an inscription which existed on a triumphal arch in Verona as hereunder; L. VITRUVIUS L. L. CERDO ARCHITECTUS. Had this arch, however, been built by our Author, it would not prove him a native of the city, not looking to the difference in the agnomen, a circumstance which Alciati attempted to reconcile, by supposing that of Pollio to be a corruption of Pellio, and that then it would be synonymous with Cerdo, both the one and the other signifying a currier. Philander, however, completely refuted this conjecture, if indeed refutation could have been necessary, for the arch itself contained

Xll a violation of a rule insisted on by Vitruvius, tbat dentils should not occur under mutuli. From the fragments of inscriptions relative to the Vitruvia family, found in the neighbourhood of Formiae (the present Mola di Gaeta), it has been presumed, without a great stretch of probability, that it was in this territory Vitruvius was born. The age in which he lived was doubtless between the time of the death of Julius Caesar and the battle of Actium, though some have assigned it to the reign of Titus. But his omission of the mention of a great number of magnificent buildings, erected after the time of Augustus, and his especial mention of the theatre of Pompey as the only one of stone, sufficiently prove that such a conjecture is not warranted by circumstances. The dedication, moreover, points to Augustus as the patron of Vitruvius : and the incident of C. Julius, the son of Masa- nissa, who was in the army of Julius Caesar, having lodged with him, as related in the third chapter of his eighth book, seems clearly to indicate the time of his existence. It is likely that the following treatise was composed when he was advanced in life, and that it was presented to his patron after he had assumed the title of Augustus, that is, twenty-five years before the Christian sera, inasmuch as he speaks of a temple erected to Augustus, in his Basilica at Fano. He was, as may be collected from his writings, by no means a successful professor, though well born and well educated, and certainly, notwithstanding the common sophisms of the age which appear in his work,

a man of no ordinary talent. He was no less a military than a civil architect, as may be gathered from the introduction to his first book, as well as from the rules, now incomprehensible, but doubtless in his time sufficiently clear, laid down in the tenth book, respecting military engines. From the introduction to the third book we learn, that he was of small stature, and lived to some age. That he should have met with opposition from his brethren is quite consonant with later experience, for the rabble of ignorant builders, and artisans, and draftsmen, who in the present day call themselves architects, and meet with considerable patronage, are of the same class as those that flourished subsequently to the time of our author, even in the ime of Michael Angelo da Buonaroti.

(y*-4  t^u isjo-il gii. U-j..?7' :>■& , i.ood tid ci.isci}\xixc^fil o4h  ; ca/il * /-»l^AjUO^i-JJj ^ , ; •  a i - ..J? ri <-yfcb ; m;,I. t *!*ufo vliiio^lL^JL : n; tj i--v:-.a.> ?i- m^vi ..toxl^no v^xilkn ^rn '* ]••,« is ;• ii.'.i 'hr 'fvn  orf jjuff rk' Jck- ■ 1 -.  t/j *. The wood blocks are better than in any preceding edition. 1567.—“M. Vitruvii Pollionis de Architectura Libri decern, cum commentariis Danielis J .ai bari, electi Patriarch® Aquileiensis: multis aedificiorum, horologiorum, et Machinarum descriptionibus, et figuris, una cum indi- cibus copiosis, auctis et illustratis. Venetiis. Apud Franciscium Senensem, et loan. Crugher Germanum, 1567.” Folio. Barbaro in this seems to have mostly followed Philander’s edition of 1552. 1586.—“ M. Vitruvii Pollionis de Architectura Libri decern, ad Caesarem Augustum, omnibus omnium editionibus longe emendatiores, collatis veteribus exemplis. Ac-

XIX cesserunt Gulielmi Philandri Castilionii, Civis Rom. Annotationes castigatiores, et plus tertia parte locu- pletiores. Adiecta est Epitome in omnes Georgii Agri- colse de mensuris et ponderibus libros eodem auctore. Cum Graeco pariter et Latino Indice locupletissimo, m.d.lxxxvl Apud loan. Tornaesium, typogr. Reg. Lugd.”—Quarto. Harwood says that the Editor of this edition was Jo. Tornsesius junior, and that it is more correct, though less elegant than that produced by the father in 1552. 1649.—“M. Vitruvii Pollionis de Architectura Libri decern, cum notis, castigationibus, et observationibus Gulielmi Philandri integris; Danielis Barbari excerptis, et Claudii Salmasii passim insertis. Prsemittuntur Eleinenta Architectures collecta ab illustri Viro Henrico Wottono Equite Anglo. Accedunt Lexicon Vitruvianum Bernardini Baldi Urbinatis Guastellse Abbatis; et eiusdem scamilli impares Vitruviani. De Pictura Libri tres absolutissimi Leonis Baptistse de Albertis. De Sculptura excerpta maxime animad- vertenda ex Dialogo Pomponii Gaurici Neapolit. Lu- dovici Demontiosii Commentarius de Sculptura et Pictura. Cum variis Indicibus copiosissimis. Omnia in rm nm collecta, digesta, et illustrata a Ioanne de Laet Antverpiano. Amstelodami. Apud Lud. Elze- virium. Anno 1649.”—Folio. This has been usually considered the best edition of the Author: it was certainly at that period the most splendid edition, to which the Elzevir type not a little contributed. De Laet professes to follow the text of Philander’s edition; but neither was this accurately done, nor were the notes of Philander, nor the Lexicon of Baldus given entire, as the title would import. The most valuable novelty in this edition is the Commentary of Meibomius on those Chapters relating to musical notation. 1758.—An Edition by the Marchese Berardo Galiani. Folio. Naples. This was accompanied by an Italian Version, which will be hereafter noticed among the Italian Editions. Harwood says this is “ a fair and valuable Edition.” Not noticed by Schneider.

XX 1800.—“M. Vitruvii Pollionis de Architectura Libri decern. Ope Codicis Guelferbytani, editionis principis, cetero- rumque subsidiorum recensnit, et Glossario, in quo vocabula artis propria Germ. Ital. Gall, et Angl. explicantur, illustravit Augustus Eode Dessaviensis. Berolini, sumtibus Aug. Mylii. 1800.”—Two thin volumes Quarto. The plates to this Edition were published in Folio in the ensuing year to the number of twenty. The text of this Edition is of little value. The plates though ill executed and the glossary in five languages, are useful to the Architectural student. It has no notes appended. 1807.—“ M. Vitruvii Pollionis de Architectura Libri Decern ad Optimas Editiones collati. Prsemittitur Notitia literaria Studiis Societatis Bipontinai. Accedit Ano- nymi scriptoris veteris Architecturee compendium cum indicibus. Argentorati Ex Typographia Socie- tatis mdcccvii.” —Octavo. 1807.—“Marci Vitruvii Pollionis De Architectura Libri Decem. Ex fide librorum scriptorum recensuit, emendavit, suisque et vivorum doctorum Annotation - ibus illustravit Io. Gottlob Schneider, Saxo. Lipsise, sumtibus et Litteris G. J. Goschen. Anno mdcccvii.” —3 Vols. Imper. Octavo. This Edition, the second and third volumes of which are devoted to commentaries on the text, is the best edition of the Author which has appe red. It is much to be regretted that it was published without plates; with the addition of them it would have been a perfect book. SPANISH VERSIONS. 1602.—“Los diez libros de Arquitectura de Marco Vitruvio Pollion, traducidos del Latin por Michael de Urrea. Alcala de Henarez. 1602.”—Folio. 1787.—“Los diez libros de Architectura de M. Vitruvio Pollion, traducidos del Latin y commentados por Don Joseph Ortiz y Sanz. Presbytero. Madrid. 1787.”— Large Folio, with plates.

XXI FRENCH VERSIONS. 1547.—“•** Architecture, ou Art de bien bastir de Marc Vitruve Pollion, autheur Romain antique; mis de Latin en Francois par Jan Martin, secretaire de Monseign. le Cardinal de Lenoncourt. Pour le Roy ty&s Chres- tien Henry II. A Paris. Pour la veuve et heritiers de Jan. Barbe. 1547.”—Folio. This was the first French Version of Vitruvius. 1572.—“A Reprint of the preceding by Jerome de Marnef et Guil. Cavellat. Fol. Paris. 1618.—The Third French Version. Printed in Quarto at Geneva from the two preceding Editions by Jean de Tournes. 1673.—“Les dix Livres d’Architecture de Vitruve, corrigez et traduits nouvellement en Francis, avec des Notes et dgs Figures. A Paris, chez Jean Bapt. Coignard. 1673.”—Large Folio. This was a version worthy of Perrault the Translator. Though in many parts it is impossible to agree with him in his Interpretation of the Text, yet it is a most valuable work. The figures are numerous and well executed on copper. 1684.—“ Les dix Livres d’Architecture de Vitruve corrigez et traduits nouvellement en Francois, avec des Notes et des Figures. Seconde edition revue, corrigee, et augmentee. Par M. Perrault de l’Academie royale des Sciences, Docteur en Medecine de la Faculte de Paris. A Paris, chez Jean Bapt. Coignard, Impri- meur ordinaire du Roy, rue St. Jaques, a la Bible d’or. 1684.’’—Large Folio. This is, notwithstanding the wear of the plates, the best of Perrault’s Editions ; and copies of it, in which Seb. Le Clerc’s plate representing the machinery for raising the two large stones of the Pediment of the Louvre appears, are valuable. 1816.—“ L’Architecture de Vitruve traduite en Francis, avec des remarques par le Bioul. Bruxelles 1816.”— Quarto, with plates. b  3

xxii GERMAN VERSIONS. 1548.—“Vitruvius Teusch. Alles mit schoenen kiinstlichen Eiguren und Antiquiteten, und Sonderlichen Com- mentarien zu mehrerem Bericht und besserem Ver- stand gezieret und erklmret. Durch D. Gualtherum H. Rivium. Medic. &  Mathem. Vormals in teutsche sprach zu transferiren nock von niemand sonst under- standen, sondern filr unmiiglichen geacktet worden. Zu Niirnberg triickts Johan Petreius.”—Folio. With plates on wooden blocks cut by Erard Scham. 1575.—A repetition of the preceding. Basil. Folio. 1614.—Another repetition with this title :—“ Vitruvius. Des allernamhafftigsten unnd Hocherfahrnesten, Roemis- chen Architecti, unndKunstreichen Werck oder Baw- meisters, Marci Vitruvij Pollionis, zehen Bucher von der Architectur und k nstlichem Bawen. Ein SchL'ssel und eynleitung aller Mathematischen unnd Mechanischen Kunst, Scharfsinniger fleissiger nach- trachtung oder Speculation kiinstliclier AYercke &c. Erstmals verteutscht, unnd in Truck verordnet durch D. Gualterum H. Rivium. Vormals in Teutsche Sprach zu transferiren, noch von niemand sonst understanden, sonder fur unm glich geachtet worden. Jetzt aber an vilen Orten verbessert. Getruckt zu Basel. Durch Sebastian Henricpetri, im Jar nach der Geburt Christi m.dc.xiv.” —Folio. 1796.—“Des Marcus ATtruvius Pollio Baukunst. Aus der Rcemischen Urschrift ibersetzt von August Rode. Zwey Thaile. Leipzig.”—Quarto. In the first volume is a life of Vitruvius. This edition contains many illustrations of the Author. ENGLISH. 1771. and 1791.—“The Architecture of Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, translated from the original Latin by AY. Newton, Architect, London, Dodsley.”—Large Folio. The first volume was published in 1771, and the second in 1791, with many plates. This Edition exhibits such

XX111 a mixture of ignorance of the language of the original in the translation of the text, with so much intelligence in some of the notes, that it is difficult to believe they are from the same hand. Latterly has appeared a translation of the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth books of Vitruvius, by W. Wilkins, A.M. F.S.A. The text of these, however, is not entire, and the introduction to each of them is omitted altogether.—So that hitherto the only entire English version is that by Newton above mentioned. ITALIAN. —“ Di Lucio Vitruvio Pollione de Architectura Libri Dece traducti de Latino in Vulgare affigurati: Com- mentati: et con mirando ordine Insigniti: per il quale facilmente potrai trovare la multitudine de li abstrusi et reconditi Vocabuli a li soi loci etin epsa tabula con summo studio expositi et enucleati ad Immensa utili- tate de ciascuno Studioso et benivolo di epsa opera. Cum Gratia et Privilegio.” At the end,—“Quifinisce L’opera praeclara de Lucio Vitruvio Pollione de Architectura traducta de latino in vulgare: Historiata e Commentata a le spese e Instantia del ^Magnifico D. Augustino Gallo Citadino Comense e Eegio Referenda- rio in epsa Citate: e del nobile D. Aluisio da Pirovano Patricio Milanese: Emendata e Castigata cum summo studio e diligentia excepto alchune poclie cosse quale sono poste nella infrascripta tabula de li Errori li quali non se hano possuto fugire per langustia dil tempo,” &c.—“ E Impressa nel amoena et delectevole Citate de Como per Magistro Gotardo da Ponte Citadino Milanese; ne 1 anno del nro Signore Jesu Christo m.d.xxi. xv. men sis Julii. Regnante il Christianis- simo Re de Franza Francisco Duca di Milano,”—&c.— “ Laus Deo.”—Large Folio. This book, which is exceedingly rare, is the earliest version of Vitruvius, and was translated with the assistance of Benedict Jovius, by Csesar Csesarianus, who was one of the architects of the Cathedral of Milan, circa 1491. As late as the year 1810 it was in contemplation to finish some parts

XXIV of that cathedral according to drawings left by him. Some of the wood engravings of this edition were reduced and inserted in the counterfeit copy of the Giunta edition of 1523. Among the curious plates inserted in this translation, are, on folio 14, and on the recto and reverse of folio 15, a plan and two sections of the Cathedral at Milan. 1524.—“ M. L. Vitruvio Pollione de Architectura traducto di Latino in Vulgare dal vero exemplare con le figure a li soi loci con mirando ordine insignito : con la sua tabula alphabetica: per la quale potrai facilmente trovare la moltitudine de li vocabuli a li soi loci con summa diligentia expositi: et enucleati: mai piu da niuno altro fin al presente facto ad immensa utilitate di ciascuno studioso.”—At the end, “ Stampata in Ve- netia, in le Case Joanne Antonio et Piero Fratelli de Sabio. Nel anno del Signore, m.d.xxiiii. Del mese di Martio.”—Folio. This is a repetition of the preceding edition, but without the notes of Csesar Csesarianus. 1535. —“M. L. Vitruvio Pollione di Architettura dal vero esemplare latino nella volgar lingua tradotto : e con le figure a suoi luoghi con mirando ordine insignito. Anchora con la tavola alfabetica: nella quale facilmente si potra trovare la moltitudine de vocaboli a suoi luoghi con gran diligenza esposti; e dichiarati: mai piu da alcuno altro fin al presente stampato a grande utilita di ciascuno studioso.”—At the end of the Index,—“In Vinegia, per Nicolo de Aristotile detto Zoppino. Nelli anni del Signor nostro Giesu Christo dopo la sua nativita m.d.xxxy. del mese di Marzo.” Folio. This is copied from the preceding edition, but the Index is not quite so copious. 1536. —A Translation of the first five Books, by Gianbatista Caporali. Perugia. Folio. 1556.—“ I died libri dell’ Architettura di M. Vitruvio, tra- dutti et commentati da Monsignor Barbaro Eletto Patriarca d’Aquileggia. Con due Tavole, Puna di tutto quello si contiene per i Capi nell’ Opera, P altar per dechiaratione di tutte le cose d’ importanza. In Vinezia per Francesco Marcolini, mdlvi.”— Folio. 1567.—“I dieci Libri dell’ Architettura di M. Vitruvio.

XXY Tradotti et commentati da Mons. Daniel Barbaro eletto Patriarca d’Aquileia, da lui riveduti et ampliati; et hora in piu commoda forma ridotti. In Yenetia, Appresso Francesco de’ Franceschi Senese, et Giovanni Crugher Alemanno Compagni mdlxvii.”— Quarto. 1584.—“ I dieci Libri,”—&c. (ut supra).—“In Yenetia, Appresso Francesco de’ Franceschi Senese mdlxxxiiii.” Quarto. Similar to the preceding edition. 1629.—“I Dieci Libri dell’ Arcliitettura di M. Yitruvio, Tradotti, et Commentati da Monsig. Daniel Barbaro Patriarca d’Aquileia, da lui riveduti, et ampliati; et hora in questa nuova Impressione per Maggior Comodita del Lettore, le materie di ciascun Libro ridotte sotto capi, &c. In Yenetia. Appresso Alessandro de Yecchj, mdc xxix.”—Small folio. Yery similar to the preceding edition. 1641.—“ L’Arcliitettura di Yitruvio Libri Dieci. Tradotta, e Commentata da M onsig. Daniel Barbaro Patriarca d’Aquileia, da lui riveduta, et ampliata. Et hora in questa nuova Impressione per maggior comodita del Lettore, le materie di ciascun Libro ridotte sotto capi etc. In Yenetia, mdcxxxxi. Per li Turrini.”—Small folio. Little differing from the preceding. 1750 .—“ L’Arcliitettura di M. Yitruvio Pollione colla tradu- zione Italiana e Comento del Marchese Berardo Acca- demico Ercolanense, &c. In Napoli mdcclviii. Nella Stamperia Simoniana.” Folio. Accompanied with the Latin text. 1790—Another Edition, by Galiani, similar to the preceding, but without the Latin text.

THE ARCHITECTURE OP MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO.

LIST OF THE CHAPTERS. BOOK THE FIRST. Introduction. (Page 1.) What Architecture is : and of the Education of an Architect. Chap. I. Of those things on which Architecture depends. Chap. II. Of the different Branches of Architecture. Chap. HI. Of the choice of Healthy Situations. Chap. IV. Of the Foundations of Walls and Towers. Chap. V. Of the Distribution and Situation of Buildings within the Walls. Chap. VI. Of the choice of Situations for Public Buildings. Chap. VII. BOOK THE SECOND. Introduction. (Page 29.) Of the Origin of Building. Chap. I. Of the Origin of all things according to the opinions of Philosophers. Chap. II. Of Bricks. Chap. III. Of Sand. Chap. IV. Of Lime. Chap. V. Of Pozzolana. Chap. VI. Of Stone Quarries. Chap. VII. Of the different kinds of Walls. Chap. Vni. Of Timber. Chap. IX. Of the Firs called r- upernas and Infernas, and of the Apennines. Chap. X. BOOK THE THIRD. Introduction. (Page 61.) Of the Design and Symmetry of Temples. Chap. I. Of the Five Species of Temples. Chap. II. Of Foundations and of Columns and their Ornaments. Chap. III.

XXX BOOK THE FOURTH. Introduction. (Page 79.) Of the Origin of the Three Sorts of Columns, and of the Corinthian Capital. Chap. I. Of the Ornaments of Columns. Chap. II. Of the Doric Proportions. Chap. III. Of the Interior of the Cell and the Arrangement of the Pro- naos. Chap. IV. Of the different Aspects of Temples. Chap. Y. Of the Proportions of the Doors of Temples. Chap. VI. * Of the Tuscan Proportions : of Circular Temples, and other Species. Chap. VII. Of Altars to the Gods. Chap. VIII. BOOK THE FIFTH. Introduction. (Page 99.) Of the Forum and Basilica. Chap. I. Of the Treasury, Prison, and Curia. Chap. II. Of the Theatre, and of its Healthy Situation. Chap. III. Of Harmony. Chap. IV. Of the Vases used in the Theatre. Chap. V. Of the Shape of the Theatre. Chap. VI. Of the Portico and other Parts of the Theatre. Chap. VII. Of the Three Sorts of Scenes, and of the Theatres of the Greeks. Chap. VIII. Of the Porticos and Passages behind the Scenes. Chap. IX. Of the Arrangement and Parts of Baths. Chap. X. Of the Palaestra. Chap. XI. Of Harbours and other Buildings in Water. Chap. XII. BOOK THE SIXTH. Introduction, (Page 27.) Of the Situation of Buildings according to the Nature of Different Places. Chap. I. Of the Proportions of Private Buildings to suit the Nature of their Sites. Chap. H.

XXXI Of Courts (Cavsedia). Chap. III. Of Courts (Atria), Wings or Aisles (Alse), the Tablinum and the Peristylium. Chap. IV. Of Triclinia, (Eci, Exedrae, Pinacothecse and their Dimensions. Chap. V. Of the Grecian (Eci. Chap. VI. Of the proper Aspects of different Sorts of Buildings. Chap. VII. Of the Forms of Houses suited to different Ranks of Persons- Chap. VIII. Of the Proportions of Houses in the Country. Chap. IX. Of the Arrangement and Parts of Grecian Houses. Chap. X. Of the Strength of Buildings. Chap. XI. BOOK THE SEVENTH. Introduction. (Page 151.) Of Pavements. Chap. I. Of Tempering Lime for Stucco. Chap. II. Of Stucco Work. Chap. III. Of Stucco Work in Damp Places. Chap. IV. Of the Use of Painting in Buildings. Chap. V. Of the Preparation of Marble for Plastering. Chap. VI. Of Natural Colours. Chap. VII. Of Vermilion and Quicksilver. Chap. VIII. Of the Preparation of Vermilion. Chap. IX. Of Artificial Colours. Of Black. Chap. X. Of Blue, and of Burnt Yellow. Chap. XI. Of White Lead, Verdigrease, and Red Lead. Chap. XII. Of Purple. Chap. XIII. Of Factitious Colours. Chap. XIV. BOOK THE EIGHTH. Introduction. (Page 177.) Of the Method of Finding Water. Chap. I. Of Rain Water. Chap. II. Of the Nature of various Waters. Chap. III. Of the Qualities of Waters in certain Places. Chap. IV. Of the Means of Judging of Water. Chap. V.

XXX11 Of Levelling, and the Instruments used for that Purpose. Chap. VI. Of conducting Water. Chap. VII. BOOK THE NINTH. Introduction. (Page 201.) Of the Method of Doubling the Area of a Square. Chap. I. Of the Method of constructing a Right Angled Triangle. Chap. II. Of the Method of detecting Silver when mixed with Gold. Chap. III. Of the Universe and the Planets. Chap. IV. Of the Sun’s Course through the Twelve Signs. Chap. V. Of the Northern Constellations Chap. VI. Of the Southern Constellations. Chap. VII. Of the Construction of Dials by the Analemma. Chap. VHI. Of Various Dials, and their Inventors. Chap. IX. BOOK THE TENTH. Introduction. (Page 229.) Of Machines and Engines. Chap. I. Of Machines of Draught. Chap. II. Of Another Sort of Machine of Draught. Chap. in. Of a Similar Machine, of Greater Power. Chap. IV. Of Another Machine of Draught. Chap. V. Of Ctesiphon’s Contrivance for Removing Great Weights. Chap. VI. Of the Discovery of the Quarry whence Stone was procured for the Temple of Diana at Ephesus. Chap. VH. Of the Principles of Mechanics. Chap. VIII. Of Engines for Raising Water ; and first of the Tympanum. Chap. IX. Of Another Sort of Tympanum, and of Water Mills. Chap.X. Of the Water Screw. Chap. XI. Of the Machine of Ctesibius for Raising Water to a Considerable Height. Chap. XTT. Of Water Engines. Chap. XIII.

XXX111 Of Measuring a Journey. Chap. XIV. Of Catapultse and Scorpions. Chap. XV. Of the Construction of the Balista. Chap. XYI. Of the Proportions of the Balista. Chap. XVII. Of the Preparation of the Balistse and Catapultse. Chap. XVIII. Of Machines for Attack. Chap. XIX. Of the Tortoise for Filling Ditches. Chap. XX. Of other Sorts of Tortoises. Chap. XXI. Of Machines for Defence. Chap. XXII.

XXXV EXPLANATION OF THE VIGNETTES TO FACE THE COMMENCEMENT OF EACH BOOK. Book I. Plan of Borne. II. Mount Atkos, as proposed to be sculptured by Dinocrates. IH. Plan of Athens. IV. Corinthian, Ionic, and Doric Orders. V. A Forum. VI. Protkyrum and Boman Shops. Vn. Specimen of ancient Fresco Painting. VIII. View of an Aqueduct. IX. The Earth, and Signs of the Zodiac. X. Catapult® from the Trajan Column

i

*%feaf'-'^^y^«^' gfc Ai&gj§5£ - ,>^i 1 .-:>3»«*iitiJ*'«'. -<*S 'S:«

N § 3 i E-i H h- London: Lockwood & C°, 7 Stationers' Hall Court,Ludgate Hill

THE ARCHITECTURE OB’ MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO. BOOK THE FIRST. INTRODUCTION. Whilst, 0 Csesar, your god-like mind and genius were engaged in acquiring the dominion of the world, your enemies having been all subdued by your unconquerable valour; whilst the citizens were extolling your victories, and the conquered nations were awaiting your nod; whilst the Roman senate and people, freed from alarm, were enjoying the benefit of your opinions and counsel for their governance'; I did not presume, at so unfit a period, to trouble you, thus engaged, with my writings on Architecture, lest I should have incurred your displeasure. When, however, I found that your attention, not exclusively devoted to state affairs, was bestowed on the state of the public buildings, so that the republic was not more indebted to you for its extended empire, in the addition of so many provinces, than for your numerous public buildings by which its grandeur is amply manifested, I considered it right that no time should he lost in laying these precepts before you. My reverence for the memory of your virtuous father, to B

2 whom I was well known, and from whom, now a participator in council with the gods, the empire descended to you, has been the cause of your good will towards me. Hence, together with M. Aurelius, P. Numisius, and Cn. Cornelius, I have been appointed to, and receive the emoluments arising from the care of, the various engines of war which you assigned to me on the recommendation of your sister. As, through your kindness, I have been thus placed beyond the reach of poverty, I think it right to address this treatise to you; and I feel the more induced to do so from your having built, and being still engaged in the erection of, many edifices. It is proper to deliver down to posterity, as a memorial, some account of these your magnificent works. I have therefore given such definite directions for the conduct of works, that those already executed, as well as those hereafter to be constructed, may be by you well known and understood. In the following pages I have developed all the principles of the art.,

3 CHAPTER I. WHAT ARCHITECTURE IS: AND OE THE EDUCATION OF AN ARCHITECT. Architecture is a science arising out of many other sciences, and adorned with much and varied learning; hy the help of which a judgment is formed of those works which are the result of other arts. Practice and theory are its parents. Practice is the frequent and continued contemplation of the mode of executing any given work, or of the mere operation of the hands, for the conversion of the material in the best and readiest way. Theory is the result of that reasoning which demonstrates and explains that the material wrought has been so converted as to answer the end proposed. Wherefore the mere practical architect is not able to assign sufficient reasons for the forms he adopts; and the theoretic architect also fails, grasping the shadow instead of the substance. He who is theoretic as well as practical, is therefore doubly armed; able not only to prove the propriety of his design, hut equally so to carry it into execution. In architecture, as in other arts, two considerations must be constantly kept in view; namely, the intention, and the matter used to express that intention: but the intention is founded on a conviction that the matter wrought will fully suit the purpose; he, therefore, who is not familiar with both branches of the art, has no pretension to the title of architect. • An architect should be ingenious, and apt in the acquisition of knowledge. Deficient in either of these qualities, he cannot be a perfect master. He should be a good writer, a skilful draftsman, versed in geometry and optics, expert at figures, acquainted with history, informed on the principles of natural and moral philosophy, somewhat of a musician, not ignorant of

the sciences both of law and physic, nor of the motions, laws, and relations to each other, of the heavenly bodies. By means of the first named acquirement, he is to commit to writing his observations and experience, in order to assist his memory. Drawing is employed in representing the forms of his designs. Geometry affords much aid to the architect: to it he owes the use of the right line and circle, the level and the square ; whereby his delineations of buildings on plane surfaces are greatly facilitated. The science of optics enables him to introduce with judgment the requisite quantity of light, according to the aspect. Arithmetic estimates the cost, and aids in the measurement of the works; this, assisted by the law's of geometry, determines those abstruse questions, wherein the different proportions of some parts to others are involved. Unless acquainted with history, he will be unable to account for the use of many ornaments which he may have occasion to introduce. For instance; should any one wish for information on the origin of those draped matronal figures crowned with a mutulus and cornice, called Caryatides, he will explain it by the following history. Cary a, a city of Peloponnesus, joined the Persians in their war against the Greeks. These in return for the treachery, after having freed themselves by a most glorious victory from the intended Persian yoke, unanimously resolved to levy war against the Caryans. Cary a was, in consequence, taken and destroyed, its male population extinguished, and its matrons carried into slavery. That these circumstances might be better remembered, and the nature of the triumph perpetuated, the victors represented them draped, and apparently suffering under the burthen with which they were loaded, to expiate the crime of their native city. Thus, in their edifices, did the antient architects, by the use of these statues, hand down to posterity a memorial of the crime of the Caryans. Again; a small number of Lacedsemonians, under the command

5 of Pausanias, "the son of Cleombrotus, overthrew the prodigious army of the Persians at the battle of Platea. After a triumphal exhibition of the spoil and booty, the proceeds of the valour and devotion of the victors were applied by the government in the erection of the Persian portico ; and, as an appropriate monument of the victory, and a trophy for the admiration of posterity, its roof was supported by statues of the barbarians, in their magnificent costume ; indicating, at the same time, the merited contempt due to their haughty projects, intimidating their enemies by fear of their courage, and acting as a stimulus to their fellow countrymen to be always in readiness for the defence of the nation. This is the origin of the Persian order for the support of an entablature ; an invention which has enriched many a design with the singular variety it exhibits. Many other matters of history have a connexion with architecture, and prove the necessity of its professors being well versed in it. Moral philosophy will teach the architect to be above meanness in his dealings, and to avoid arrogance : and will make him just, compliant and faithful to his employer ; and what is of the highest importance, it will prevent avarice gaining an ascendancy over him: for he should not be occupied with the thoughts of filling his coffers, nor with the desire of grasping every thing in the shape of gain, but, by the gravity of his manners, and a good character, should be careful to preserve his dignity. In these respects we see the importance of moral philosophy; for such are her precepts. That branch of philosophy which the Greeks call ^ucnoAoyta, or the doctrine of physics, is necessary to him in the solution of-various problems ; as for instance, in the conduct of water, whose natural force, in its meandering and expansion over flat countries, is often such as to require restraints, which none know how to apply, but those who are acquainted with the laws of nature: nor, indeed, unless grounded in the first principles of physic,

6 can he study with profit the works of Ctesibius, Archimedes, and many other authors who have written on the subject. Music assists him in the use of harmonic and mathematical proportion. It is, moreover, absolutely necessary in adjusting the force of the balistae, catapult®, and scorpions, in whose frames are holes for the passage of the homotona, which are strained by gut-ropes attached to windlasses worked by hand-spikes. Unless these ropes are equally extended, which only a nice ear can discover by their sound when struck, the bent arms of the engine do not give an equal impetus when disengaged, and the strings, therefore, not being in equal states of tension, prevent the direct flight of the weapon. So the vessels called by the Greeks, which are placed in certain recesses under the seats of theatres, are fixed and arranged with a due regard to the laws of harmony and physics, their tones being fourths, fifths, and octaves ; so that when the voice of the actor is in unison with the pitch of these instruments, its power is increased and mellowed by impinging thereon. He would, moreover, be at a loss in constructing hydraulic and other engines, if ignorant of music. Skill in physic enables him to ascertain the salubrity of different tracts of country, and to determine the variation of climates, which the Greeks call kX t^ara : for the air and water of different situations, being matters of the highest importance, no building will be healthy without attention to those points. Law should be an object of his study, especially those parts of it which relate to partywvalls, to the free course and discharge of the eaves’ waters, the regulations of sesspools and sewage, and those relating to window lights. The laws of sewage require his particular attention, that he may prevent his employers being involved in law-suits when the building is finished. Contracts, also, for the execution of the works, should he drawn with care and precision: because, when without legal flaws, neither party will be able to take advan-

7 tage of the other. Astronomy instructs him in the points of the heavens, the laws of the celestial bodies, the equinoxes, solstices, and courses of the stars ; all of which should he well understood, in the construction and proportions of clocks. Since, therefore, this art is founded upon and adorned with so many different sciences, I am of opinion that those who have not, from their early youth, gradually climbed up to the summit, cannot, without presumption, call themselves masters of it. Perhaps, to the uninformed, it may appear unaccountable that a man should he able to retain in his memory such a variety of learning; but the close alliance with each other, of the different branches of science, will explain the difficulty. For as a body is composed of various concordant members, so does the whole circle of learning consist in one harmonious system. Wherefore those, who from an early age are initiated in the different branches of learning, have a facility in acquiring some knowledge of all, from their common connexion with each other. On this account Pythius, one of the antients, architect of the noble temple of Minerva at Priene, says, in his commentaries, that an architect should have that perfect knowledge of each art and science which is not even acquired by the professors of any one in particular, who have had every opportunity of improving themselves in it. This, however, cannot be necessary; for how can it be expected that an architect should equal Aristarchus as a grammarian, yet should he not be ignorant of grammar. In music, though it be evident he need not equal Aris- toxenus, yet he should know something of it. Though he need not excel,, as Apelles, in painting, nor as Myron or Polycletus, in sculpture, yet he* should have attained some proficiency in these arts. So, in the science of medicine, it is not required that he should equal Hippocrates. Thus also, in other sciences, it is not important that pre-eminence in each be gained, but he must not,

8 however, he ignorant of the general principles of each. For in such a variety of matters, it cannot be supposed that the same person can arrive at excellence in each, since to be aware of their several niceties and hearings, cannot fall within his power. We see how few of those who profess a particular art arrive at perfection in it, so as to distinguish themselves : hence, if but few of those practising an individual art, obtain lasting fame, how should the architect, who is required to have a knowledge of so many, be deficient in none of them, and even excel those who have professed any one exclusively. Wherefore Pythius seems to have been in error, forgetting that art consists in practice and theory. Theory is common to, and may be known by all, but the result of practice occurs to the artist in his own art only. The physician and musician are each obliged to have some regard to the beating of the pulse, and the motion of the feet, but who would apply to the latter to heal a wound or cure a malady ? so, without the aid of the former, the musician affects the ears of his audience by modulations upon his instrument. The astronomer and musician delight in similar proportions, for the positions of the stars, which are quartile and trine, answer to a fourth and fifth in harmony. The same analogy holds in that branch of geometry which the Greeks call \6yoiii ft*  w;-; t T. :> ’ ;■ ii*  V'si'O i t Hbit&r T ,• -jC ' • : *  H. .>xy ■ ; r-.ni,V>*&* Jj#« Pdf . X»XT'- a ; ^ r - > : nrfT UiIt i«oa .od i*U*of/ - * Silt. lo *«o iTcf- ‘ &Lcffv>>. fctdfei ;js.:'’^X'iO .yA . ;:,v y;h :.-j .T-./T feir?!:-*/ V ,AiAq:;r::AL i'iArn - i-’I ■ 0$ . V-' ’«fiMiteif07>¥- A r ;-..oX * • ! Jv- A b, .• ■ ■ ■-. "I , an.xxT$o,*;:A{n'£ f i!' A ';o :r;x•  A,.q y^x k>**3§tA .tnd + At ; .ten)' la aDiwjjiln;  IVua  Ar'A'-t^a: 1 ■ iry'v.ttf e 7 x> yjj,i«i(<'; v>V7fi vjf ''xy A.lo-y- -,,’ > TV ? ,7ii ihM»:w -S.JVfriyta ,a-js4£ *|0yO-. 4 r >. ; .x A>;xr>'t>£. aid . id "'A ..,• ■ lAi; x./A uti :T;-.; .y;; > oiir ■. A • ■ . ' ■■"""■ r  tin ,«I/0.';r;fD $ilJj Cat i . : 1|> *Y* » * *:«£ ot v^.f! ,!"i i .•: . r _•. i ; o>-i i. 1 ' •_ .'i'.'iT  V> sdhon o-'.i lian ■ . ; x Mb:.: m&il ixoft silt Vs tuo jnq> *nr>tiiop n. ni-ed fyirm * ■■ V> •;oi I'd fillerf - inji y-rji orfrfflq iu{.t dsirfw o.t pd at hi  ioqjj &L1 r /faii- oj vabiHfyxc lo .o^oq’mx arf .'■*%£ To  V.KiZtfioIoa :jv.« gJRHTlfiQI dti^' *:.-:r/ r  Ot ins{b feiiBltti OROlC*«r a&pdt vd :■,■■«# . u 'L TSiliO ' va  o:\IiiWH ha& a  l n;-tf H.ydihOi  io ' :::>i;* sui^enoa ©»/ v/i- :;rjooddaincA in\:\\  Kndr.I,nyfo8a£pxii I hnosstf ...da x: i.?«ri 3i-\4& "- a,-:' too'j-lflijy -nft V> '/rx-psa odT  ijiiifqxo tit t ir,vJ  I’l*.'-: : ''lif itfi*  aeaJi&tfp ijoJm ,' g.giMpfd m  lK>v;'i-N*-.'i> lo hA.y-AiOs:,-;) $di.w\-c-yfin  prig-.^oi. ■,«•• d . - .r- M si * pilt. *?$g M

'■'O a

THE AKCHITECTUBE OF MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO. BOOK THE SECOND. INTRODUCTION. Dinockates the architect, relying on the powers of his skill and ingenuity, whilst Alexander was in the midst of his conquests, set out from Macedonia to the army, desirous of gaining the commendation of his sovereign. That his introduction to the royal presence might he facilitated, he obtained letters from his countrymen and relations to men of the first rank and nobility about the king’s person; by whom being kindly received, he besought them to take the earliest opportunity of accomplishing his wish. They promised fairly, but were slow in performing; waiting, as they alleged, for a proper occasion. Thinking, however, they deferred this without just grounds, he took his own course for the object he had in view. He was, I should state, a man of tall stature, pleasing countenance, and altogether of dignified appearance. Trusting to the gifts with which nature had thus endowed him, he put off his ordinary clothing, and having anointed himself with oil, crowned his head with a wreath of poplar, slung a lion’s skin across his left shoulder, and carrying a large club in his right hand, he sallied forth to the royal tribunal, at a period when

the king was dispensing justice. The novelty of his appearance excited the attention of the people; and Alexander soon discovering, with astonishment, the object of their curiosity, ordered the crowd to make way for him, and demanded to know who he was. “ A Macedonian architect,” replied Dinocrates, “ who suggests schemes and designs worthy your royal renown. I propose to form Mount Athos into the statue of a man holding a spacious city in his left hand, and in his right a huge vase, into which shall be collected all the streams of the mountain, which shall thence he poured into the sea.” Alexander, delighted at the proposition, made immediate inquiry if the soil of the neighbourhood were of a quality capable of yielding sufficient produce for such a state. When, however, he found that all its supplies must he furnished by sea, he thus addressed Dinocrates : “ I admire the grand outline of your scheme, and am well pleased with it: but I am of opinion he would be much to blame who planted a colony on such a spot. For as an infant is nourished by the milk of its mother, depending thereon for its progress to maturity, so a city depends on the fertility of the country surrounding it for its riches, its strength in population, and not less for its defence against an enemy. Though your plan might be carried into execution, yet I think it impolitic. I nevertheless request your attendance on me, that I may otherwise avail myself of your ingenuity.” From that time Dinocrates was in constant attendance on the king, and followed him into Egypt; where Alexander having perceived a spot, at the same time naturally strong, the centre of the commerce of the country, a land abounding with corn, and having those facilities of transport which the Nile afforded, ordered Dinocrates to build a city whose name should be Alexandria. Dinocrates obtained this honour through his comely person and dignified deportment. But to me, Emperor, nature hath denied an ample stature; my face is wrinkled with age,

31 and sickness has impaired my constitution. Deprived of these natural accomplishments, I hope, however, to gain some commendation through the aid of my scientific acquirements, and the precepts I shall deliver. In the first hook I have treated of architecture, and the parts into which it is divided; of the walls of a city, and the division of the space within the walls. The directions for the construction of sacred buildings, their proportions and symmetry, will follow and be explained: but I think they will be out of place, unless I previously give an account of the materials and workmanship used in their erection, together with an investigation of their several properties and application in different cases. Even this I must preface with an inquiry into the origin and various species of the earliest buildings, and their gradual advance to perfection. In this I shall follow the steps of Nature herself, and those who have written on the progress from savage to civilized life, and the inventions consequent on the latter state of society. Thus guided, I will proceed. CHAPTEE I. OF THE OBIGTN OF BUILDING-. Mankind originally brought forth like the beasts of the field, in woods, dens, and groves, passed their lives in a savage manner, eating the simple food which nature afforded. A tempest, on a certain occasion, having exceedingly agitated the trees in a particular spot, the friction between some of the branches caused them to take fire; this so alarmed those in the neighbourhood of the occurrence, that they betook themselves to flight. Eeturn- ing to the spot after the tempest had subsided, and finding the warmth which had thus been created extremely comfortable, they added fuel to the fire excited, in order

to preserve the heat, and then went forth to invite others, by signs and gestures, to come and witness the discovery. In the concourse that thus took place, they testified their different opinions and expressions by different inflexions of the voice. From daily association words succeeded to these indefinite modes of speech ; and these becoming by degrees the signs of certain objects, they began to join them together, and conversation became general. Thus the discovery of fire gave rise to the first assembly of mankind, to their first deliberations, and to their union in a state of society. For association with each other they were more fitted by nature than other animals, from their erect posture, which also gave them the advantage of continually viewing the stars and firmament, no less than from their being able to grasp and lift an object, and turn it about with their hands and fingers. In the assembly, therefore, which thus brought them first together, they were led to the consideration of sheltering themselves from the seasons, some by making arbours with the houghs of trees, some by excavating caves in the mountains, and others in imitation of the nests and habitations of swallows, by making dwellings of twigs interwoven and covered with mud or clay. From observation of and improvement on each others’ expedients for sheltering themselves, they soon began to provide a better species of huts. It was thus that men, who are by nature of an imitative and docile turn of mind, and proud of their own inventions, gaining daily experience also by what had been previously executed, vied with each other in their progress towards perfection in building. The first attempt was the mere erection of a few spars united together with twigs and covered with mud. Others built their walls of dried lumps of turf, connected these walls together by means of timbers laid across horizontally, and covered the erections with reeds and boughs, for the purpose of sheltering themselves from the inclemency of the seasons. Finding, however,

that flat coverings of this sort would not effectually shelter them in the winter season, they made their roofs of two inclined planes meeting each other in a ridge at the summit, the whole of which they covered with clay, and thus carried off the rain. We are certain that buildings were thus originally constructed, from the present practice of uncivilized nations, whose buildings are of spars and thatch, as may be seen in Gaul, in Spain, in Portugal, and in Aquitaine. The woods of the Colchi, in Pontus, furnish such abundance of timber, that they build in the following manner. Two trees are laid level on the earth, right and left, at such distance from each other as will suit the length of the trees which are to cross and connect them. On the extreme ends of these two trees are laid two other trees transversely: the space which the house will inclose is thus marked out. The four sides being thus set out, towers are raised, whose walls consist of trees laid horizontally but kept perpendicularly over each other, the alternate layers yoking the angles. The level interstices which the thickness of the trees alternately leave, is filled in with chips and mud. On a similar principle they form their roofs, except that gradually reducing the length of the trees which traverse from angle to angle, they assume a pyramidal form. They are covered with boughs and smeared over with clay ; and thus after a rude fashion of vaulting, their quadrilateral roofs are formed. The Phrygians, who inhabit a champain country destitute of timber, choose natural hillocks, which they pierce and hollow out for their accommodation, as well as the nature of the soil will permit. These dwellings they cover with roofs constructed of logs bound together, covered with reeds and straw, and coated with a large quantity of earth. This species of covering protects the hut from the extreme heat of the summer, as well as from the piercing cold of the winter. The weeds which grow in the vicinity of pools are used in other parts for the cover- c 3

mg of huts. Each nation, in short, has its own way of building, according to the materials afforded and the habits of the country. At Marseilles the roofs are covered with straw and earth mixed up together, instead of tiles. At Athens,, even to this day, the Areopagus, an example of remote antiquity, is covered with clay; and the house of Eomulus in the capitol, by its thatched roof, clearly manifests the simple manners and habits of the ancients. It is from such specimens we are enabled to form just ideas of the early method of building. Daily practice made the original builders more skilful, and experience increased their confidence; those who took more delight in the science making it their exclusive profession. Thus man, who, in addition to the senses which other animals enjoy in common with him, is gifted by nature with such powers of thought and understanding, that no subject is too difficult for his apprehension, and the brute creation are subject to him from his superiority of intellect, proceeded by degrees to a knowledge of the other arts and sciences, and passed from a savage state of life to one of civilization. From the courage which his gradual success naturally excited, and his engagement in those various speculations with which the arts are connected, his ideas expanded; and from building huts he soon proceeded to the erection of houses constructed with brick walls or with stones, whose roofs were of timber covered with tiles. Thus by experience and observation the knowledge of certain proportions was attained, which in the beginning were fluctuating and uncertain ; and advantage being taken of the bounty of nature, in her supply of timber and other building materials, the rising art was so cultivated that by the help of other arts mere necessity was lost sight of; and by attending to the comforts and luxuries of civilized society, it was carried to the highest degree of perfection. I shall now, to the best of my ability, proceed to treat of those materials which are used in build-

35 ing, their quality, and use. Lest any one object that the order of my treatise on the matters in question be not well arranged, and that tbis book should have bad precedence of the last, I think it proper to state, that in writing a Dissertation on Architecture I considered myself bound, in the first place, to set forth those branches of learning and science with which it is connected, to explain its origin and different species, and to enumerate the qualifications which an architect should possess. Hence, having first adverted to those principles on which the art depends, I shall now proceed to an explanation of the nature and use of the different materials employed in the practice of it. This work not being intended for a treatise on the origin of architecture; that origin, and the degrees by which it passed to its present state of perfection, is only incidentally mentioned. This hook is consequently in its proper place. I shall now therefore treat, in an intelligible manner, of the materials which are appropriate for building, how they are formed by nature, and of the analysis of their component parts. For there is no material nor body of any sort whatever which is not composed of various elementary particles; and if their primary composition he not duly understood, no law of physics will explain their nature to our satisfaction. CHAPTER II. OF THE ORIGIN OF ALL THINGS ACCORDING TO THE OPINIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS. Thales thought that water was the first principle of all things. Heraclitus, the Ephesian, who, on account of the obscurity of his writings, was called o-Koreivos by the Greeks, maintained a similar doctrine in respect of fire.

36 Democritus, and his follower Epicurus, held similar opinions with regard to atoms ; by which term is understood such bodies as are incapable of being cut asunder, or, as some say, of further division. To water and fire the philosophy of the Pythagoreans added air and earth. Hence Democritus, though loosely expressing himself, seems to have meant the same thing, when he calls the elements indivisible bodies ; for when he considers them incapable of corruption or alteration, and of eternal duration and infinite solidity, his hypothesis makes the particles not yet so connected as to form a body. Since, therefore, all bodies consist of and spring from these elements, and in the great variety of bodies the quantity of each element entering into their composition is different, I think it right to investigate the nature of their variety, and explain how it affects the quality of each in the materials used for building, so that those about to build may avoid mistakes, and be, moreover, enabled to make a proper choice of such materials as they may want. CHAPTER III. OF BRICKS. I shall first treat of bricks, and the earth of which they ought to be made. Gravelly, pebbly, and sandy clay are unfit for that purpose; for if made of either of these sorts of earth, they are not only too ponderous, hut walls built of them, when exposed to the rain, moulder away, and are soon decomposed, and the straw, also, with which they are mixed, will not sufficiently bind the earth together, because of its rough quality. They should be made of earth of a red or white chalky, or a strong sandy nature. These sorts of earth are ductile and cohesive,

37 and not being heavy, bricks made of them are more easily handled in carrying np the work. The proper seasons for brick-making are the spring and autumn, because they then ^ry more equably. Those made in the summer solstice are defective, because the heat of the sun soon imparts to their external surfaces an appearance of sufficient dryness, whilst the internal parts of them are in a very different state; hence, when thoroughly dry, they shrink and break at those parts which were dry in the first instance; and thus broken, their strength is gone. Those are best that have been made at least two years ; for in a period less than that they will not dry thoroughly. When plastering is laid and sets hard on bricks which are not perfectly dry, the bricks, which will naturally shrink, and consequently occupy a less space than the plastering, will thus leave the latter ito stand of itself. From its being extremely thin, and not capable of supporting itself, it soon breaks to pieces ; and in its failure sometimes involves even that of the wall. It is not, therefore, without reason that the inhabitants of Utica allow no bricks to be used in their buildings which are not at least five years old, and also approved by a magistrate. There are three sorts of bricks; the first is that which the Greeks call Didoron (StSc opov),  being the sort we use; that is, one foot long, and half a foot wide. The two other sorts are used in Grecian buildings ; one is called Pentadoron, the other Tetradoron. By the word Doron the Greeks mean a palm, because the word Swpov signifies a gift which can be borne in the palm of the hand. That sort, therefore, which is five palms each way is called Pentadoron; that of four palms, Tetradoron. The former of these two sorts is used in public buildings, the latter in private. Each sort has half bricks made to suit it; so that when a wall is executed, the course on one of the faces of the wall shows sides of whole bricks, the other face of half bricks; and being worked to the line on each face, the

38 bricks on each bed bond alternately over the course below. Besides the pleasant varied appearance which this method gives, it affords additional strength, by the middle of a brick, on a rising course, falling over the vertical joints of the course thereunder. The hricks of Calentum in Spain, Marseilles in France, and Pitane in Asia, are, when wrought and dried, specifically lighter than water, and hence swim thereon. This must arise from the porosity of the earth whereof they are made; the air contained in the pores, to which the water cannot penetrate, giving them a buoyant property. Earth of this sort being, therefore, of such a light and thin quality, and impervious to water, be a lump thereof of whatever size, it swims naturally like pumice-stone. Bricks of this sort are of great use for building purposes ; for they are neither heavy nor liable to be injured by the rain. CHAPTER IV. OF SAND. In buildings of rubble work it is of the first importance that the sand be fit for mixing with the lime, and unalloyed with earth. The different sorts are these; black, white, deep red, and bright red. The best of each of these sorts is that which, when rubbed between the fingers, yields a grating sound. That, also, which is earthy, and does not possess the roughness above named, is fit for the purpose, if it merely leave a stain or any particles of earth on a white garment, which can easily be brushed away. If there be no sand-pits where it can be dug, river sand or sifted gravel must be used. Even sea sand maybe had recourse to, but it dries very slowly;

39 and walls wherein it is used must not be much loaded, unless carried up in small portions at a time. It is not, however, fit for those walls that are to receive vaulting. In plastered walls, built with sea sand, the salt which exudes destroys the plaster ; hut plaster readily adheres to and dries on walls built with new pit sand, and vaulting may safely spring from them. If sand have been dug a long time, and exposed to the sun, the moon, and the rain, it loses its binding quality, and becomes earthy; neither when used does it bind the rubble stones together so as to prevent them sliding on their beds and falling out: nor is it fit to be used in walls where great weights are to be supported. Though pit sand is excellent for mortar, it is unfit for plastering; for being of a rich quality, when added to the lime and straw, its great strength does not suffer it to dry without cracks. The poorness of the river sand, when tempered with beaters, makes the plastering as hard as cement. CHAPTER V. OF LIME. Having treated of the different sorts of sand, we proceed to an explanation of the nature of lime, which is burnt either from white stone or flint. That which is of a close and hard texture is better for building walls ; as that which is more porous is better for plastering. When slaked for making mortar, if pit sand be used, three parts of sand are mixed with one of lime. If river or sea sand be made use of, two parts of sand are given to one of lime, which will be found a proper proportion. If to river or sea sand, potsherds ground and passed through a sieve, in the proportion of one third part, be added, the mortar will be better for use. The cause of

40 the mass becoming solid when sand and water are added to the lime, appears to be, that stones, like other bodies, are a compound of elements : those which contain large quantities of air being soft, those which have a great proportion of water being tough, of earth, hard, of fire, brittle. For stones which, when burnt, would make excellent lime, if pounded and mixed with sand, without burning, would neither bind the work together, nor set hard; but having passed through the kiln, and having lost the property of their former tenacity by the action of intense heat, their adhesiveness being exhausted, the pores are left open and inactive. The moisture and air which were in the body of the stone, having, therefore, been extracted and exhausted, the heat being partially retained, when the substance is immersed in water before the heat can be dissipated, it acquires strength by the water rushing into all its pores, effervesces, and at last the heat is excluded. Hence, limestone, previous to its burning, is much heavier than it is after having passed through the kiln : for, though equal in bulk, it is known, by the abstraction of the moisture it previously contained, to lose one-third of its weight by the process. The pores of limestone, being thus opened, it more easily takes up the sand mixed with it, and adheres thereto; and hence, in drying, binds the stones together, by which sound work is obtained. CHAPTER VI. OF POZZOLANA. There is a species of sand which, naturally, possesses extraordinary qualities. It is found about Bake and the territory in the neighbourhood of Mount Vesuvius; if mixed with lime and rubble, it hardens as well under

41 water as in ordinary buildings. This seems to arise from the hotness of the earth under these mountains, and the abundance of springs under their bases, which are heated either with sulphur, bitumen, or alum, and indicate very intense fire. The inward fire and heat of the flame which escapes and hums through the chinks, makes this earth light; the sand-stone (tophus), therefore, which is gathered in the neighbourhood, is dry and free from moisture. Since, then, three circumstances of a similar nature, arising from the intensity of the fire, combine in one mixture, as soon as moisture supervenes, they cohere and quickly harden through dampness ; so that neither the waves nor the force of the water can disunite them. That these lands are affected with heat, as surmised, is evident, because in the mountains of Cumse and at Babe, sweating places are excavated, in which the hot vapour rising upwards from the intensity of the fire, strikes through the earth, and so -escapes in these places that they are singularly beneficial for the purpose. It is moreover said that in former times fires under Vesuvius existed in abundance, and thence evolved flames about the fields. Thus that which we call sponge-stone, or Pompeian pumice-stone, burnt from another species of stone, appears to be acted on by fire so as to possess a quality of this sort. The species of sponge-stone, however, thence obtained, is not found except in the neighbourhood of iEtna and the hills of Mysia, which the Greeks call kclt aKeKavfjLevoL, and places of such description. If, therefore, in these places hot springs and heated vapours are found in the cavities of the mountains, and the spots are recorded by the antients to have been subject to fires issuing out of the lands, it seems certain that the moisture is extracted from the sand-stone and earth in their neighbourhood, by the strength of the fire, as from limestone in a kiln. Dissimilar and unequal actions being thus concentrated towards the same end, the great want of moisture quickly supplied by water binds and strongly

42 cements them, and also imparts a rapid solidity, by means of the heat common to both the bodies. It is needless to enquire why, as there are many hot springs in Tuscany, we do not there find a powder, which, for the same reason, would harden under water: should I he thereon questioned, I would thus explain the circumstance. All lands do not possess similar qualities; nor is stone uni- p versally found. Some lands are earthy, others gravelly, m others gritty, others sandy: in short, the quality of land, in different parts of the earth, varies as much as even p 0] the climate itself. Tor instance; on the side of the | i0 f Apennines towards Tuscany, sand-pits are found in y or abundance; whereas, on the other side of the Apen- C0I nines, facing the Adriatic, none are discoverable : so also in Achaia, Asia, and universally on the other side of the ; an( sea, such things are not known. It does not therefore ! ^ follow, that in all places abounding with hot springs all > ^ other circumstances should he similar. Nature has not t  ^ made all things to suit the convenience of man, hut dif- | m ferently and fortuitously. Hence, in places where the : ree mountains are not earthy, hut of stone, the force of the ^ fire escaping through the chinks burns that which is soft and tender, whilst that which is hard is left. Thus the ^ earth of Campania, when burnt, becomes a powder; that m of Tuscany a coal. Both of these are of great use in sea building, one species being very serviceable in land ^ works, the other in works under water. In Tuscany, ^ however, the quality of the material is softer than sand- a§ stone, hut harder than earth; and from its entire sub- ^ jection to the action of the sub-existing fire, it becomes that sort of sand which is called carbunculus. me aii' poi eas dri mi] qu: Ai

43 CHAPTER VII. OF STONE QUAEEIES. I have described the different species of lime and sand, and their qualities. Stone quarries, from which square and rubble stones are procured and prepared for the purposes of building, will now be considered. The qualities of these differ very much. Some stone is soft; the red, for instance, found in the neighbourhood of Rome, in the countries of the Pallienses, Fidenates, and Alb ante. Some moderately so, as the Tiburtine, Amiternine, Soractine, and those of that sort. Others are hard, even as flints. There are many other species, as the red and black sandstone (tophus) of Campania, and the white sort of Umbria, Picenum, and Venice, which is cut with a saw like wood. The soft species have this advantage, that when recently taken from the quarry they are easily worked, and answer well under cover; but when used in open and exposed situations, and subjected to the action of the frost and rain, they soon become friable, and moulder away. They are also much affected by the salt near the sea-shore, and are not capable of preserving their strength when exposed to great heat. The Tiburtine stones, and those of a similar nature, resist great weights as well as the action of the weather, but are easily injured by fire. The instant they are exposed to that they are ruined, from their possessing so small a quantity of moisture ; their earthy particles, also, are few, and the quantity of air and fire in them considerable. Hence, from the small portion of earth and water which they contain, the fire easily acts upon them, and, occupying the interstices, drives out the air with accumulated violence, and communicates its own hot quality to them. There are many quarries on the borders of the Tarquinienses, called the Anician quarries, in colour much resembling the Alban

44 stone. They are worked in most abundance in the neighbourhood of the Yolscinian Lake, and in the prefecture of Statonia. This stone has numberless good qualities ; neither frost nor fire affects it. It is hard and durable, from its containing but little air and fire, but a moderate quantity of moisture, and much earth. Close in texture, it is not injured by the weather nor by heat. The monuments about Ferentinum, which are built of this stone, prove its durability ;  among these may be observed large statues well executed, bas-reliefs on a smaller scale, and acanthus leaves and flowers elegantly carved, which, though long since wrought, appear as fresh as though they were but recently finished. From the stones of the above quarries the metal founders make their casting moulds, for which they are well calculated. If this stone were to be had near Eome, it would be used in all works about the city, to which it is indeed worthy to be applied. But as necessity, on account of proximity to the quarries, obliges us to use the red sort of stone, that of the Pal- lienses and other species in the immediate vicinity of the city, in order to find that which is least defective, let it be selected as follows. Two years before the commencement of the building, the stones should be extracted from the quarries in the summer season : by no means in the winter; and they should then be exposed to the vicissitudes and action of the weather. Those which, after two years’ exposure, are injured by the weather, maybe used in the foundations; but those which continue sound after this ordeal, will endure in the parts above ground. These rules apply equally to squared as to rubble or unsquared stone work.

CHAPTER VIII. OF THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF WALLS. The different species of walls are, the reticulatum (net-like), a method now in general use, and the incer- tum (uncertain), which is the antient mode. The reticulatum is the most beautiful, but is very liable to split, from the beds of the stones being unstable, and its deficiency in respect of bond. The incertum, on the contrary, course over course, and the whole bonded together, does not present so beautiful an appearance, though stronger than the reticulatum. Both species should be built of the smallest sized stones, that the walls, by sucking up, and attaching themselves to, the mortar, may last the longer. For as the stones are of a soft and porous nature, they absorb, in drying, the moisture of the mortar, and this, if used plentifully, will consequently exercise a greater cementing power; because from their containing a larger portion of moisture, the wall will not, of course, dry so soon as otherwise; and as soon as the moisture is absorbed by the pores of the stone from the mortar, the lime, losing its power, leaves the sand, so that the stones no longer adhere to it, and in a short time the work becomes unsound. We may see this in several monuments about the city, which have been built of marble or of stones squared externally; that is, on the face, but filled up with rubble run with mortar. Time, in these, has taken up the moisture of the mortar, and destroyed its efficacy, by the porosity of the surface on which it acted. All cohesion is thus ruined, and the walls fall to decay. He who is desirous that this may not happen to his work, should build his two face walls two feet thick either of red stone or brick or common flint, binding them together with iron cramps run with lead, and duly preserving the middle space or cavity.

The materials, in this case, not being thrown in at random, hut the work well brought up on the beds, the upright joints properly arranged, and the face walls, moreover, regularly tied together, they are not liable to bulge, nor he otherwise disfigured. In these respects one cannot refrain from admiring the walls of the Greeks. They make no use of soft stone in their buildings: when, however, they do not employ squared stone, they use either flint or hard stone; and, as though building with brick, they cross or break the upright joints, and thus produce the most durable work. There are two sorts of this species of work; one called isodomum, the other pseudisodomum. The first is so called, because in it all the courses are of an equal height; the latter received its name from the unequal heights of the courses. Both these methods make sound work : first, because the stones are hard and solid, and therefore unable to absorb the moisture of the mortar, which is thus preserved to the longest period; secondly, because the beds being smooth and level, the mortar does not escape ; and the wall moreover, bonded throughout its whole thickness, becomes eternal. There is still another method, which is called ZfXTrXtKTov ( emplectum), in use even among our country workmen. In this species the faces are wrought. The other stones are, without working, deposited in the cavity between the two faces, and bedded in mortar as the wall is carried up. But the workmen, for the sake of despatch, carry up these casing walls, and then tumble in the rubble between them; so that there are thus three distinct thicknesses ; namely, the two sides or facings, and the filling in. The Greeks, however, pursue a different course, laying the stones flat, and breaking the vertical joints; neither do they fill in the middle at random, but, by means of bond stones, make the wall solid, and of one thickness or piece. They moreover cross the wall, from one face to the other, with bond stones of a single piece, which they call Siarovot, (diatoni) tending

47 greatly to strengthen the work. He, therefore, who is desirous of producing a lasting stucture, is enabled, by what I have laid down, to qhoose the sort of wall that will suit his purpose. Those walls which are built of soft and smooth-looking stone, will not last long. Hence, when valuations are made of external walls, we must not put them at their original cost; but having found, from the register, the number of lettings they have gone through, we must deduct for every year of their age an eightieth part of such cost, and set down the remainder or balance as their value, inasmuch as they are not calculated to last more than eighty years. This is not the practice in the case of brick walls, which, whilst they stand upright, are always valued at their first cost. Thus, in some states, not only public and private buildings, but even royal structures, are built of brick. We may instance that part of the wall at Athens towards Mounts Hymettus and Pentelicus, the temples of Jupiter and Hercules, in which the cells are of brick, whilst the columns and their entablatures are of stone, in Italy the ancient and exquisitely wrought wall of Arezzo, and at Tralles a palace for the Attalic kings, which is the official residence of the priest. Some pictures painted on brick walls at Sparta, after being cut out, were packed up in wooden cases and transported to the Comitium to grace the iEdileship of Yarro and Murena. In the house of Croesus, which the Sardians call Gerusia, established for the repose and comfort of the citizens in their old age, as also in the house of Mausolus, a very powerful king of Halicarnassus, though all the ornaments are of Proconnesian marble, the walls are of brick, are remarkably sound at the present day, and the plastering with which they are covered is so polished that they sparkle like glass. The prince who caused them to be thus built was not, however, restrained by economy; for, as king of Caria, he must have been exceedingly rich. Neither could it be urged that it was from want of skill and taste in archi-

48 tecture, that he did so. Born at Mylasa, and perceiving that Halicarnassus was a situation fortified by nature, and a place well adapted for commerce, with a commodious harbour, he fixed his residence there. The site of the city bears a resemblance to a theatre, as to general form. In the lowest part of it, near the harbour, a forum was built: up the hill, about the middle of the curve, was a large square in the centre of which stood the mausoleum, a work of such grandeur that it was accounted one of the seven wonders of the world. In the centre, on the summit of the hill, was- the temple of Mars, with its colossal statue, which is called d upoXiOos,  sculptured by the eminent hand of Leocharis. Some, however, attribute this statue to Leocharis; others to Timotheus. On the right, at the extreme point of the curve, was the temple of Venus and Mercury, close to the fountain of Salmacis. It is a vulgar error, that those who happen to drink thereat are affected with love-sickness. As, however, this error is general, it will not he amiss to correct the impression. It is not only impossible that the water should have the effect of rendering men effeminate and unchaste; but, on the contrary, that alluded to is clear as crystal, and of the finest flavour. The origin of the story, by which it gained the reputation of the above quality, is as follows. When Melas and Arevanias brought to the place a colony from Argos and Troezene, they drove out the barbarous Carians and Lelegse. These, betaking themselves to the mountains in bodies, committed great depredations, and laid waste the neighbourhood. Borne time afterwards, one of the colonists, for the sake of the profit likely to arise from it, established close to the fountain, on account of the excellence of its water, a store where he kept all sorts of merchandize ; and thus it became a place of great resort of the barbarians who were drawn thither. Coming, at first, in small, and at last in large numbers, the barbarians by degrees shook off their savage and uncivilized habits, and changed

49 them, without coercion, for those of the Greeks. The fame, therefore, of this fountain, was acquired, not by the effeminacy which it is reputed to impart, but by its being the means through which the minds of the barbarians were civilized. I must now, however, proceed to finish my description of the city. On the right summit we have described the temple of Venus and the above named fountain to have been placed: on the left stood the royal palace, which was planned by Mausolus himself. This commanded, on the right, a view of the forum and harbour, and of the whole circuit of the walls : on the left, it overlooked a secret harbour, hidden by the mountains, into which no one could pry, so as to be aware of what was transacting therein. In short, from his palace, the king, without any person being aware of it, could give the necessary orders to his soldiers and sailors. After the death of Mausolus, the Rhodians, indignant at his wife, who succeeded to the government, governing the whole of Caria, fitted out a fleet, for the purpose of seizing the kingdom. When the news reached Artemisia, she directed her fleet to lie still in the secret harbour; and having concealed the sailors and mustered the marines, ordered the rest of the citizens to the walls. When the well appointed squadron of the Rhodians should enter the large harbour, she gave orders that those stationed on the walls should greet them, and promise to deliver up the town. The Rhodians, leaving their ships, penetrated into the town; at which period Artemisia, by the sudden opening of a canal, brought her fleet round, through the open sea, into the large harbour; whence the Rhodian fleet, abandoned by its sailors and marines, was easily carried out to sea. The Rhodians, having now no place of shelter, were surrounded in the forum and slain. Artemisia then embarking her own sailors and marines on board of the Rhodian fleet, set sail for Rhodes. The inhabitants of that city seeing their vessels return decorated with laurels, D

50 thought their fellow citizens were returning victorious, and received their enemies. Artemisia having thus taken Rhodes, and slain the principal persons of the city, raised therein a trophy of her victory. It consisted of two brazen statues, one of which represented the state of Rhodes, the other was a statue of herself imposing a mark of infamy on the city. As it was contrary to the precepts of the religion of the Rhodians to remove a trophy, they encircled the latter with a building, and covered it after the custom of the Greeks, giving it the name afiarov.  If therefore, kings of such great power did not despise brick buildings, those who, from their great revenue and spoils in war, can afford the expense not only of squared and rough stone, but even of marble buildings, must not despise brick structures when well executed. I shall now explain why this species of walls is not permitted in the city of Rome, and also why such walls ought not to be permitted. The public laws forbid a greater thickness than one foot and a half to be given to walls that abut on a public way, and the other walls, to prevent loss of room, are not built thicker. Now brick walls, unless of the thickness of two or three bricks, at all events of at least one foot and a half, are not fit to carry more than one floor, so that from the great population of the city innumerable houses would be required. Since, therefore, the area it occupies would not in such case contain the number to be accommodated, it became absolutely necessary to gain in height that which could not be obtained on the plan. Thus by means of stone piers or walls of burnt bricks or unsquared stones, which were tied together by the timbers of the several floors, they obtained in the upper story excellent dining rooms. The Roman people by thus multiplying the number of stories in their houses are commodiously lodged. Having explained why, on account of the narrowness of the streets in Rome, walls of brick are not allowed in the city, I shall now give instructions for their use out of

51 tlie city when required, to the end that they may be durable. On the top of a wall immediately under the roof, there should be a course of burnt bricks, about one foot and a half in height, and projecting over the walls like the corona of a cornice ; thus the injury to be guarded against in such a wall, will be prevented; for if any tiles should be accidentally broken or dislodged by the wind, so as to afford a passage for the rain, the burnt brick, a protection to it, will secure the wall itself from damage, and the projection will cause the dropping of the water to fall beyond the face of the wall and thus preserve it. To judge of such burnt bricks as are fit for the purpose is not at first an easy matter ; the only way of ascertaining their goodness is to try them through a summer and winter, and, if they bear out through these undamaged, they may be used. Those which are not made of good clay are soon injured by the frost and rain; hence if unfit to be used in roofs they will be more unfit in walls. Walls built of old tiles are consequently very lasting. As to wattled walls, would they had never been invented, for though convenient and expeditiously made, they are conducive to great calamity from their acting almost like torches in case of fire. It is much better, therefore, in the first instance, to be at the expense of burnt bricks, than from parsimony to be in perpetual risk. Walls moreover, of this sort, that are covered with plaster are always full of cracks, arising from the crossing of the laths ; for when the plastering is laid on wet, it swells the wood, which contracts as the work dries, breaking the plastering. But if expedition, or want of funds, drives us to the use of this sort of work, or as an expedient to bring work to a square form, let it be executed as follows. The surface of the foundation whereon it is to stand must be somewhat raised from the ground or pavement. Should it ever be placed below them it will rot, settle, and bend forward, whereby the face of the plastering will be injured. I have already

52 treated on walls, and generally on the mode of preparing and selecting the materials for them. I shall now proceed to the use of timber in framing, and to a description of its several sorts, as also of the mode of fitting timbers together, so that they may he as durable as their nature will permit. CHAPTER IX. OF TIMBER. Timber should he felled from the beginning of the Autumn up to that time when the west wind begins to blow; never in the Spring, because at that period the trees are as it were pregnant, and communicate their natural strength to the yearly leaves and fruits they shoot forth. Being empty and swelled out, they become, by their great porosity, useless and feeble, just as we see females after conception in indifferent health till the period of their bringing forth. Hence slaves about to be sold are not warranted sound if they be pregnant; for the foetus which goes on increasing in size within the body, derives nourishment from all the food which the parent consumes, and as the time of delivery approaches, the more ailing is the party by whom it is borne: as soon as the foetus is brought forth, that which was before allotted for the nourishment of another being, once more free by the separation of the foetus, returns to reinvigorate the body by the juices flowing to the large and empty vessels, and to enable it to regain its former natural strength and solidity. So, in the Autumn, the fruits being ripened and the leaves dry, the roots draw the moisture from the earth, and the trees are by those means recovered and restored to their pristine solidity. Up to

53 the time above-mentioned the force of the wintry air compresses and consolidates the timber, and if it he then felled the period will be seasonable. In felling, the proper way is to cut through at once to the middle of the trunk of the tree, and then leave it for some time, that the juices may drain off; thus the useless liquor contained in the tree, running away through its external rings, all tendency to decay is removed, and it is preserved sound. After the tree has dried and the draining has ceased, it may be cut down and considered quite fit for use. That this should be the method pursued, will appear from the nature of shrubs. These, at the proper season, when pierced at the bottom, discharge from the heart through the holes made in them all the redundant and pernicious juices, and thus drying acquire strength and durability. On the contrary, when those juices do not escape, they congeal and render the tree defective and good for nothing. If, therefore, this process of draining them whilst in their growing state does not destroy their vigour, so much the more if the same rules are observed when they are about to be felled, will they last for a longer period when converted into timber for buildings. The qualities of trees vary exceedingly, and are very dissimilar, as those of the oak, the elm, the poplar, the cypress, the fir, and others chiefly used in buildings. The oak, for instance, is useful where the fir would be improper; and so with respect to the cypress and the elm. Nor do the others differ less widely, each, from the different nature of its elements, being differently suited to similar applications in building. First, the fir, containing a considerable quantity of air and fire, and very little water and earth, being constituted of such light elements, is not heavy: hence bound together by its natural hardness it does not easily bend, but keeps its shape in framing. The objection to fir is, that it contains so much heat as to generate and nourish the worm which is very destructive to it. It is moreover very inflammable, because its

54 open pores are so quickly penetrated by fire, that it yields a great flame. The lower part of the fir which is dose to the earth, receiving by its proximity to the roots, a large portion of moisture, is previous to felling straight and free from knots ; the upper part, throwing out by the strength of the fire it contains, a great many branches through the knots, when cut off at the height of twenty feet and rough squared, is, from its hardness, called Fus- terna. The lower part, when cut down, is sawed into four quarters, and after the outer rings of the tree are rejected, is well adapted to joinery works, and is called Sapinea. The oak, however, containing among its other elements a great portion of earth, and but a small quantity of water, air, and fire, when used under ground is of great durability, for its pores being close and compact, the wet does not penetrate it; in short its antipathy to water is so great that it twists and splits very much the work in which it is used. The holm oak (esculus), whose elements are in very equal proportions, is of great use in buildings ; it will not however stand the damp which quickly penetrates its pores, and its air and fire being driven off, it soon rots. The green oak (cerrus), the cork tree, and the beech soon rot, because they contain equal quantities of water, fire, and earth, which are by no means capable of balancing the great quantity of air they contain. The white and black poplar, the willow, the lime tree (tilia), the withy (vitex), are of great service in particular works on account of their hardness. They contain but a small portion of earth, a moderate proportion of water, but abound with fire and air. Though not hard on account of the earth in them, they are very white, and excellently adapted for carving. The alder, which grows on the banks of rivers, and is to appearance an almost useless wood, possesses nevertheless most excellent qualities, inasmuch as it contains much air and fire, not a great deal of earth, and less water. Its freeness from water makes it almost eternal in marshy foun-

55 dations used for piling under buildings, because, in these situations, it receives that moisture which it does not possess naturally. It bears immense weight and does not decay. Thus we see that timber which above ground soon decays, lasts an amazing time in a damp soil. This is most evident at Eavenna, a city, the foundations of whose buildings, both public and private, are all built upon piles. The elm tree and the ash contain much water and but little air and fire, with a moderate, portion of earth. They are therefore pliant, and being so full of water, and from want of stiffness, soon bend under a superincumbent weight. When, however, from proper keeping after being felled, or from being well dried while standing to discharge their natural moisture, they become much harder, and in framings are, from their pliability, capable of forming sound work. The maple tree, which contains but little fire and earth, and a considerable portion of air and water, is not easily broken, and is, moreover, easily wrought. The Greeks, therefore, who made yokes for oxen (called by them tvya)  of this timber, call the tree £vyaa. The cypress and pine are also singular in their nature; for though they contain equal portions of the other elements, yet, from their large proportion of water, they are apt to bend in use; they last, however, a long time, free from decay; the reason whereof is, that they contain a bitter juice, whose acrid properties prevent the rot, and are not less efficacious in destroying the worm. Buildings, in which these sorts of timber are used, last an exceedingly long time. The cedar and juniper trees possess the same qualities as the two last named ;  but as the cypress and pine yield a resin, so the cedar tree yields an oil called cedrium, with which, whatsoever is rubbed, as books, for instance, will be preserved from the worm as well as the rot. The leaves of this tree resemble those of the cypress, and its fibres are very straight. The statue of the goddess, as also the ceiled roof in the temple of Diana at

56 Ephesus, are made of it; and it is used in many other celebrated temples, on account of its great durability. These trees grow chiefly in the island of Crete, in Africa, and in some parts of Syria. The larch, which is only known in the districts on the banks of the Po and the shores of the Adriatic, on account of the extreme bitterness of its juices, is not subject to rot and attack of the worm, neither will it take fire or burn of itself, hut can only he consumed with other wood, as stone is burnt for lime in a furnace; nor even then does it emit flame nor yield charcoal, but, after a long time, gradually consumes away, from the circumstance of its containing very little fire and air. It is, on the contrary, full of water and earth; and being free from pores, by which the fire could penetrate, it repels its power, so that it is not quickly hurt thereby. Its weight is so great, that it will not float in water, when transported to any place, and is either conveyed in vessels, or floated on fir rafts. This property of the wood was discovered under the following circumstances. Julius Caesar, being with his army near the Alps, ordered the towns to supply him with provisions. Among them was a fortress called La- rignum, whose inhabitants, trusting to their fortifications, refused to obey the mandate. Caesar ordered his forces to the spot immediately. In front of the gate of this fortress stood a tower built of this species of timber, of considerable height, and constructed after the manner of a funeral pile, with beams alternately crossing each other at their extremities, so that the besieged might, from its top, annoy the besiegers with darts and stones. It appearing that the persons on the tower had no other arms than darts, which, from their weight, could not he hurled any great distance from the walls, orders were given to convey bundles of fire-wood and torches to the tower, which were quickly executed by the soldiers. As soon as the flames, reaching almost to the heavens, began to encompass the tower, every one expected to see its demo-

57 lition. But as soon as the fire was extinct, the tower appeared still unhurt; and Caesar, wondering at the cause of it, ordered it to he blockaded out of arrow’s flight, and thus carried the town, which was delivered up to him by its trembling inhabitants. They were then asked where they obtained this sort of wood, which would not burn. They shewed him the trees, which are in great abundance in those parts. Thus, as the fortress was called Larignum, so the wood, whereof the tower was built, is called larigna (larch). It is brought down the Po to Ravenna, for the use of the municipalities of Fano, Pesaro, Ancona, and the other cities in that district. If there were a possibility of transporting it to Rome, it would be very useful in the buildings there ; if not generally, at least it would be excellent for the plates under the eaves of those houses in Rome which are insulated, as they would be thus secured from catching fire, since they would neither ignite nor consume, nor burn into charcoal. The leaves of these trees are similar to those of the pine-tree ; the fibres of them straight, and not harder to work in joinery than the pine-tree. The wood contains a liquid resin, of the colour of Attic honey, which is a good remedy in cases of phthisis. I have now treated of the different sorts of timber, and of their natural properties, as well as of the proportion of the elements in each. It only remains to enquire, why that species of fir, which is known in Rome by the name of Supernas, is not so good as that which is called Infernas, whose durability in buildings is so great. I shall therefore explain how their good and bad qualities arise from the situations in which they grow, that they may be clearly understood. d 3

68 CHAPTER X. OF THE FIES CALLED SUPERNAS AND INFEENAS, AND OF THE APENNINES. The Apennines begin from the Tyrrhene Sea, extending to the Alps on one side, and the borders of Tuscany on the other; and their summits spreading in the shape of a bow, almost touch the shores of the Adriatic in the centre of their range, which ends near the Straits of Sicily. The hither side of them towards Tuscany and Campania, is in point of climate extremely mild, being continually warmed by the sun’s rays. The further side, which lies towards the upper sea, is exposed to the north, and is enclosed by thick and gloomy shadow. The trees, therefore, which grow in that part being nourished by continual moisture, not only grow to a great size, but their fibres being too much saturated with it, swell out considerably. When hewn, therefore, and squared, and deprived of their natural vegetation, they change in drying the hardness of the grain, and become weak and apt to decay, on account of the openness of their pores. They are, therefore, of little durability in buildings. On the contrary, those which grow on the side opposite to the sun, not being so porous, harden in drying, because the sun draws the moisture from trees no less than from the earth. Hence, those which grow in open sunny places, are more solid, on account of the closeness of their pores, and when squared for use, are exceedingly lasting. The fir, which goes by the name of Infernas, brought from the warm open parts, is therefore preferable to the sort called Supernas, which comes from a closely and thickly wooded country. To the best of my ability I have treated on the materials necessary for building, and their natural temperaments in respect of the different proportions of the elements which they

59 contain, as well as on their- good and bad qualities, in order that those who build may be well informed thereon. Those who follow my directions, and choose a proper material for the purpose whereto it is applied, will do right. Having thus considered the preparations to be made, we shall proceed, in the following books, to the consideration of buildings themselves, and first, to that of the temples of the immortal gods, and their symmetry and proportions as the importance of the subject requires, which will form the subject of the following book.

A TT-IEN S London :Lockwood 3c C °, 7 Stationers Hall Court,Ludgate Hill.

THE ARCHITECTURE OF MARCUS YITRUYIUS POLLIO. BOOK THE THIRD. INTRODUCTION. The Delphic Apollo, by the answer of his priestess, declared Socrates the wisest of men. Of him it is said he sagaciously observed that it had been well if men’s breasts were open, and, as it were, with windows in them, so that every one might he acquainted with their sentiments. Would to God they had been so formed. We might then not only find out the virtues and vices of persons with facility, but, being also enabled to obtain ocular knowledge of the science they profess, we might judge of their skill with certainty ; whereby those who are really talented and learned would be held in proper esteem. But as nature has not formed us after this fashion, the talents of many men lie concealed within them, and this renders it so difficult to lay down an accurate theory of any art. However an artist may promise to exert his talents, if he have not either plenty of money, or a good connexion from his situation in life ; or if he be not gifted with a good address or considerable eloquence, his study and application will go hut little way to persuade persons that he is a competent artist. We find a corroboration of this by reference to the ancient Sculptors and Painters, among whom, those who ac-

62 quired the greatest fame and applause are still living in the remembrance of posterity; such, for instance, as Myron, Polycletus, Phidias, Lysippus, and others who obtained celebrity in their art. This arose from their being employed by great cities, by kings, or by ’wealthy citizens. Now others, who, not less studious of their art, nor less endued with great genius and skill, did not enjoy equal fame, because employed by persons of lower rank and of slenderer means, and not from their unskilfulness, seem to have been deserted by fortune; such were Hellas the Athenian, Chion of Corinth, Myagrus the Phocaean, Pharax the Ephesian, Bedas of Byzantium, and many more ; among the Painters, Aristomenes of Thasos, Polycles of Adramyttium, Nicomachus and others, who were wanting neither in industry, study of their art, nor talent. But their poverty, the waywardness of fortune, or their ill success in competition with others, prevented their advancement. Nor can we wonder that from the ignorance of the public in respect of art many skilful artists remain in obscurity; but it is scandalous that friendship and connexion should lead men, for their sake, to give partial and untrue opinions. If, as Socrates would have had it, every one’s feelings, opinions, and information in science could be open to view, neither favor nor ambition would prevail, but those, who by study and great learning acquire the greatest knowledge, would be eagerly sought after. Matters are not however in this state as they ought to be, the ignorant rather than the learned being successful, and as it is never worth while to dispute with an ignorant man, I propose to shew in these precepts the excellence of the science I profess. In the first book, 0 Emperor, I laid before you an explanation of the art, its requisites, and the learning an architect should possess, and I added the reasons why he should possess them. I also divided it into different branches and defined them: then, because chiefest and most necessary, I

63 have explained the proper method of setting out the walls of a city, and obtaining a healthy site for it, and have exhibited in diagrams, the winds, and quarters whence they blow. I have shewn the best methods of laying out the streets and lanes, and thus completed the first book. In the second book I have analysed the nature and qualities of the materials used in building, and adverted to the purposes to which they are best adapted. In this third book I shall speak of the sacred temples of the immortal gods, and explain them particularly. CHAPTEE I. OF THE DESIGN AND SYMMETRY OF TEMPLES. The design of Temples depends on symmetry, the rules of which Architects should be most careful to observe. Symmetry is dependent on proportion, which the Greeks call avakoyia. Proportion is a due adjustment of the size of the different parts to each other and to the whole; on this proper adjustment symmetry depends. Hence no building can be said to be well designed which wants symmetry and proportion. In truth they are as necessary to the beauty of a building as to that of a well formed human figure, which nature has so fashioned, that in the face, from the chin to the top of the forehead, or to the roots of the hair, is a tenth part of the height of the whole body. From the chin to the crown of the head is an eighth part of the whole height, and from the nape of the neck to the crown of the head the same. From the upper part of the breast to the roots of the hair a sixth; to the crown of the head a fourth. A third part of the height of the face is equal to that from

64 the chin to the under side of the nostrils, and thence to the middle of the eyebrows the same; from the last to the roots of the hair, where the forehead ends, the remaining third part. The length of the foot is a sixth part of the height of the body. The fore-arm a fourth part. The width of the breast a fourth part. Similarly have the other members their due proportions, by attention to which the ancient Painters and Sculptors obtained so much reputation. Just so the parts of Temples should correspond with each other, and with the whole. The navel is naturally placed in the centre of the human body, and, if in a man lying with his face upward, and his hands and feet extended, from his navel as the centre, a circle be described, it will touch his fingers and toes. It is not alone by a circle, that the human body is thus circumscribed, as may be seen by placing it within a square. For measuring from the feet to the crown of the head, and then across the arms fully extended, we find the latter measure equal to the former; so that lines at right angles to each other, enclosing the figure, will form a square. If Nature, therefore, has made the human body so that the different members of it are measures of the whole, so the ancients have, with great propriety, determined that in all perfect works, each part should be some aliquot part of the whole ; and since they direct, that this be observed in all works, it must be most strictly attended to in temples of the gods, wherein the faults as well as the beauties remain to the end of time. It is worthy of remark, that the measures necessarily used in all buildings and other works, are derived from the members of the human body, as the digit, the palm, the foot, the cubit, and that these form a perfect number, called by the Greek re'Xaos. The ancients considered ten a perfect number, because the fingers are ten in number, and the palm is derived from them, and from the palm is derived the foot. Plato, therefore, called ten a perfect number. For nature

65 having formed the hands with ten fingers, a number composed of units called //.ovdSes in Greek, that number advancing beyond ten, as to eleven, twelve, &c. is not perfect until another ten are completed, units being the parts whereof such numbers are composed. The mathematicians, on the other hand, contend for the perfection of the number six, because, according to their reasoning, its divisors equal its number : for a sixth part is one, a third two, a half three, two-thirds four, which they call Sijxoipoopa,  one quarter of the diameter of the column. Thus the height and breadth, added together, will amount to one diameter and a half. If the attic base be used, it must be so subdivided that the upper part be one-third of the thickness of the column, and that the remainder be assigned for the height of the plinth. Excluding the plinth, divide the height into four parts, one of which is to be given to the upper torus ; then divide the remaining three parts into two equal parts, one will be the height of the lower torus, and the other the height of the scotia, with its fillets, which the Greeks call rpox^os ( trochilus). If Ionic, they are to be set out so that the base may each way be equal to the thickness and three-eighths of the column. Its height and that of the plinth the same as the attic base. The plinth is the same height as in that of the attic base, the remainder, which was equal to one- third part of the column’s diameter, must be divided into seven parts, three of which are given to the upper torus; E

74 the remaining four parts are to he equally divided into two, one of which is given to the upper cavetto, with its astragals and listel, the other to the lower cavetto, which will have the appearance of being larger, from its being next to the plinth. The astragals must be an eighth part of the scotia, and the whole base on each side is to project three-sixteenths of a diameter. The bases being thus completed, we are to raise the columns on them. Those of the pronaos and posticum are to be set up with their axes perpendicular, the angular ones excepted, which, as well as those on the flanks, right and left, are to be so placed that their inner lines of shaft towards the cell be perpendicular. The exterior lines will diminish upwards, as above-mentioned. Thus the diminution will give a pleasing effect to the temple. The shafts of the columns being fixed, the proportions of the capitals are thus adjusted : if pillowed, as in the Ionic, they must be so formed that the length and breadth of the abacus be equal to the diameter of the lower part of the column and one-eighteenth more, and the height of the whole, including the volutes, half a diameter. The face of the volutes is to recede within the extreme projection of the abacus one thirty-ninth part of the width of the abacus. Having set out these points on the listel of the abacus at the four angles, let fall vertical lines. These are called ca- theti. The whole height of the capital is now to be divided into nine parts and a half, whereof one part and a half is the height of the abacus, and the remaining eight are for the eye of the volute. Within the line dropt from the angle of the abacus, at the distance of one and a half of the parts last found, let fall another vertical line, and so divide it that four parts and a half being left under the abacus, the point which divides them from the remaining three and a half, may be the centre of the eye of the volute; from which, with a radius equal to one half of one of the parts, if a circle be described, it will be the size of the eye of the volute. Through its centre let an

horizontal line be drawn, and beginning from the upper part of the vertical diameter of the eye as a centre, let a quadrant be described whose upper part shall touch the under side of the abacus; then changing the centre, with a radius less than the last by half the width of the diameter of the eye, proceed with other quadrants, so that the last will fall into the eye itself, which occurs in the vertical line, at a point perpendicularly under that of setting out. The heights of the parts of the capital are to be so regulated that three of the nine parts and a half, into which it was divided, lie below the level of the astragal on the top of the shaft. The remaining parts are for the cymatium, abacus, and channel. The projection of the cymatium beyond the abacus is not to be greater than the size of the diameter of the eye. The bands of the pillows project beyond the abacus, according to the following rule. Place one point of the compasses in the centre of the eye, and let the other extend to the top of the cymatium, then describing a semicircle, its extreme part will equal the projection of the band of the pillow. The centres, from which the volute is described, should not be more distant from each other than the thickness of the eye, nor the channels sunk more than a twelfth part of their width. The foregoing are the proportions for the capitals of columns which do not exceed fifteen feet in height: when they exceed that, they must be otherwise proportioned, though upon similar principles, always observing that the square of the abacus is to be a ninth part more than the diameter of the column, so that, inasmuch as its diminution is less as its height is greater, the capital which crowns it may also be augmented in height and projection. The method of describing volutes, in order that they may be properly turned and proportioned, will be given at the end of the book. The capitals being completed, and set on the tops of the shafts, not level throughout the range of columns, but so arranged with a gauge as to follow the inclination

76 which the small steps on the stylobata produce, which must be added to them on the central part of the top of the abacus, that the regularity of the epistylia may be preserved : we may now consider the proportion of these epistylia, or architraves. When the columns are at least twelve and not more than fifteen feet high, the architrave must be half a diameter in height. When they are from fifteen to twenty feet in height, the height of the column is to be divided into thirteen parts, and one of them taken for the height of the architrave. So from twenty to twenty-five feet, let the height be divided into twelve parts and a half, and one part be taken for the height of the architrave. Thus, in proportion to the height of the column, is the architrave to be proportioned; always remembering, that the higher the eye has to reach, the greater is the difficulty it has in piercing the density of the air, its power being diminished as the height increases ; of which the result is, a confusion of the image. Hence, to preserve a sensible proportion of parts, if in high situations, or of colossal dimensions, we must modify them accordingly, so that they may appear of the size intended. The under side of the architrave is to be as wide as the upper diameter of the column, at the part under the capital; its upper part equal in width to the lower diameter of the column. Its cymatium is to be one-seventh part of the whole height, and its projection the same. After the cymatium is taken out, the remainder is to be divided into twelve parts, three of which are to be given to the lower fascia, four to the next, and five to the upper one. The zophorus, or frieze, is placed over the epistylium, than which it must be one fourth less in height; but if sculptured, it must be one fourth part higher, that the effect of the carving may not be injured. Its cymatium is to be a seventh part of its height, the projection equal to the height. Above the frieze is placed the dentil-band, whose height must be equal to that of the middle fascia of the archi-

77 trave, its projection equal to its height. The cutting thereof, which the Greeks call (metoche), is to he so executed that the width of each dentil may be half its height, and the space between them two-thirds of the width of a dentil. The cymatium is to he one-sixth part of its height. The corona, with its cymatium, hut without the cyma, is to he the same height as the middle fascia of the architrave. The projection of the corona and dentils, together is to he equal to the height from the frieze to the top of the cymatium of the corona. It may, indeed, he generally observed, that projections are more beautiful when they are equal to the height of the member. The height of the tympanum, which crowns the whole work, is to he equal to one-ninth part of the extent of the corona, measured from one extremity of its cymatium to the other, and set up in the centre. Its face is to stand perpendicularly over the architrave and the hypotrachelia of the columns. The coronse over the tympanum are to he equal to that below, without the cymse. Above the coronse are set the cymse, which the Greeks call imr ifltSes, whose height must he one-eighth more than that of the corona. The height of the acro- teria is to be equal to that of the middle of the tympanum; the central ones one-eighth part higher than those at the angles. All members over the capitals of columns, such as architraves, friezes, coronse, tympana, crowning members (fastigia), and acroteria, should not he vertical, hut inclined forwards, each a twelfth part of its height; and for this reason, that when two lines are produced from the eye, one to the upper part of a member, and the other to its lower part, the upper line or visual ray will he longer than the lower one, and if really vertical, the member will appear to lean backwards ; hut if the members are set out as above directed, they will have the appearance of being perpendicular. The number of flutes in a column is twenty-four. They are to he hollowed, so that a square kept passing round their surface,

78 and at the same time kept close against the arrises of the fillets, will touch some point in their circumference and the arrises themselves throughout its motion. The additional thickness of the flutes and fillets in the middle of the column, arising from the entasis or swelling, will be proportional to the swelling. On the cymse of the coronse to the sides of temples, lions’ heads should be carved ;  and they are to be so disposed that one may come over each column, and the others at equal distances from each other, and answering to the middle of each tile. Those which are placed over the columns are to be bored through, so as to carry off the rain-water collected in the gutter. But the intermediate ones must be solid, so that the water from the tiles, which is collected in the gutter, may not be carried off in the intercolumniations, and fall on those passing. Those over the columns will appear to vomit forth streams of water from their mouths. In this book I have done my utmost to describe the proportions of Ionic temples : in that following I shall explain the proportions of Doric and Corinthian temples.

'am.# ..mf f-f.. m* mm ■ ‘ ;'t J '>f7*,':- Lv^^HC^I

V ► w ’\ ^ -Lovzdon ;Lockwood Sc C? r  7 Stationers Hall Co art, L udgateJlill ■

THE ARCHITECTURE OF MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO. BOOK THE EOUKTH. INTRODUCTION. Finding, O Emperor, that many persons have left ns precepts in Architecture, and volumes of commentaries thereon, not systematically arranged, hut mere general principles, little more indeed than scattered hints, I considered it a worthy and useful task, first, to give a general view of the whole subject, and then to dilate in each book on the detail. Thus, Csesar, I treated in the first book on the duties of an architect, and the sciences in which he should be skilled. In the second, I taught the knowledge of the different materials used in building. The third contained instructions on the arrangement of sacred buildings, their different forms and species, and the distributions appropriate to each sort; confining myself, however, to the use of the Ionic order, which, of the three, from the great delicacy of its proportions, requires the most attention in its use. I shall now, in this book, point out the difference and properties of the Doric and Corinthian Orders.

80 CHAPTER I. OF THE ORIGIN OF THE THREE SORTS OF COLUMNS, AND OF THE CORINTHIAN CAPITAL. The Corinthian Column is, except in its capital, of the same proportion as the Ionic : hut the additional height of its capital makes it taller and more graceful; the Ionic capital being hut one third of the diameter of the shaft in height, whilst that of the Corinthian is equal to the thickness of the shaft. Thus, the two-thirds of the thickness of the shaft, which are added to its height, give it, in that respect, a more pleasing effect. The other members which are placed on the Columns, are borrowed either from the Doric or Ionic proportions : inasmuch as the Corinthian itself has no regular settled rules for its cornice, and other ornaments, hut is regulated by analogy, either from the mutuli in the cornice, or the guttse in the architrave, or epistylium in the Doric order; or it is set out according to the laws of the Ionic, with a sculptured frieze, dentils and a cornice. Thus, from the two orders, by the interposition of a capital, a third order arises. The three sorts of columns, different in form, have received the appellations of Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian, of which the first is of the greatest antiquity. For Dorus, the son of Hellen, and the Nymph Orse'is, reigned over the whole of Achaia and Peloponnesus, and built at Argos, an ancient city, on a spot sacred to Juno, a temple, which happened to be of this order. After this, many temples similar to it, sprung up in the other parts of Achaia, though the proportions which should be preserved in it, were not as yet settled. But afterwards when the Athenians, by the advice of the Delphic oracle in a general assembly of the different states of Greece, sent over into Asia thirteen colonies at once, and appointed a governor or leader to each, reserving the chief command

81 for Ion, the son of Xuthus and Cretisa, whom the Delphic Apollo had acknowledged as son; that person led them oyer into Asia, and occupied the borders of Caria, and there built the great cities of Ephesus, Miletus, Myus (which was long since destroyed by inundation, and its sacred rites and suffrages transferred by the Ionians to the inhabitants of Miletus), Priene, Samos, Teos, Colophon, Chios, Erythree, Pliocaea, Clazomense, Lehedos, and Melite. The last, as a punishment for the arrogance of its citizens, was detached from the other states in a war levied pursuant to the directions of a general council; and in its place, as -a mark of favour towards king Attalus, and Ar- sinoe, the city of Smyrna was admitted into the number of Ionian states, which received the appellation of Ionian from their leader Ion, after the Carians and Lelegae had been driven out. In this country allotting different spots for sacred purposes, they began to erect temples, the first of which was dedicated to Apollo Panionios, and resembled that which they had seen in Achaia, and they gave it the name of Doric, because they had first seen that species in the cities of Doria. As they wished to erect this temple with columns, and had not a knowledge of the proper proportions of them, nor knew the way in which they ought to he constructed, so as at the same time to he both fit to carry the superincumbent weight, and to produce a beautiful effect, they measured a man’s foot, and finding its length the sixth part of his height, they gave the column a similar proportion, that is, they made its height including the capital, six times the thickness of the shaft, measured at the base. Thus the Doric order obtained its proportion, its strength, and its beauty, from the human figure. Under similar notions they afterwards built the temple of Diana. But in that, seeking a new proportion, they used the female figure as the standard : and for the purpose of producing a more lofty effect, they first made it eight times its thickness in height. Under it they placed a base, after the manner e 3

8 2 of a shoe to the foot; they also added volutes to its capital, like graceful curling hair hanging on each side, and the front they ornamented with cymatia and festoons in the place of hair. On the shafts they sunk channels, which hear a resemblance to the folds of a matronal garment. Thus two orders were invented, one of a masculine character, without ornament, the other bearing a character which resembled the delicacy, ornament, and proportion of a female. The successors of these people, improving in taste, and preferring a more slender proportion, assigned seven diameters to the height of the Doric column, and eight and a half to the Ionic. That species, of which the Ionians were the inventors, has received the appellation of Ionic. The third species, which is called Corinthian, resembles in its character, the graceful elegant appearance of a virgin, in whom, from her tender age, the limbs are of a more delicate form, and whose ornaments should be unobtrusive. The invention of the capital of this order is said to be founded on the following occurrence. A Corinthian virgin, of marriageable age, fell a victim to a violent disorder. After her interment, her nurse, collecting in a basket those articles to which she had shewn a partiality when alive, carried them to her tomb, and placed a tile on the basket for the longer preservation of its contents. The basket was accidentally placed on the root of an acanthus plant, which, pressed by the weight, shot forth, towards spring, its stems and large foliage, and in the course of its growth reached the angles of the tile, and thus formed volutes at the extremities. Callimachus, who, for his great ingenuity and taste was called by the Athenians Catatechnos, happening at this time to pass by the tomb, observed the basket, and the delicacy of the foliage which surrounded it. Pleased with the form and novelty of the combination, he constructed from the hint thus afforded, columns of this species in the country about Corinth, and arranged its proportions, determining

their proper measures by perfect rules. The method of setting out the capital is as follows. Its height, including the abacus, is to be equal to the diameter of the lower part of the column. The width of the abacus is obtained by making its diagonal from opposite angles, equal to twice its height. It will • thus have a proper front on each face. The faces of the four sides of the abacus are to be curved inwards from its extreme angles, equal to one ninth of its extent. The thickness of the lower part of the capital must be equal to the diameter of the top of the shaft, exclusive of the apothesis and astragal. The height of the abacus is a seventh of the height of the whole capital; the remainder is to be divided into three parts, one of which is to be given to the lower leaf, the middle leaf will occupy the space of the next third part, the stalks or caulicoli will be the same height as the last named, out of which the leaves spring for the reception of the abacus. Large volutes are generated from these, which branch out towards the angles. The smaller volutes spread out towards the flowers, which are introduced in the centre of each abacus. Flowers whose diameters are equal to the height of the abacus, are to be placed in the central part of each of its faces. By attention to these rules the Corinthian capital will be properly proportioned. Other sorts of capitals are however placed on these columns, which, differing in proportion, and standing on a different sort of shaft, cannot be referred to any other class; but their origin, though the detail be changed, is traced to, and deduced from the Corinthian, the Ionic, and the Doric, their only differences arising from a variation of the arrangement of the sculpture on them.

84 CHAPTER II. OF THE ORNAMENTS OF COLUMNS. The origin and invention of the different species of columns having been discussed, it is now necessary to say something on the subject of their ornaments, how they originated, and upon what principles and for what purposes they were invented. In all buildings the timber framed work, which has various names, crowns them. The timbers vary as much in their uses as in their names. Those are called bressummers (trahes) which are placed over columns, pilasters (parastatse), and antse. In the framing of floors, beams (tigna) and boards (axes) are used. If the span of a roof he large, a ridge piece (columen) is laid on the top of the king post (columna, whence is derived the word column), and a tye beam (transtrum) and struts (capreoli) will be necessary. If the roof be of moderate span, the ridge piece (columen), and rafters (cantherii), of sufficient projection at their feet to throw the water off the walls, will answer the purpose. On the rafters are laid purlines (templa), and again on these, to receive the tiles, are placed common rafters (asseres), which must he of sufficient length to cover the walls and protect them. Thus each piece has its proper place, origin, and purpose. Hence, following the arrangement of timber framing, workmen have imitated, both in stone and marble, the disposition of timbers in sacred edifices, thinking such a distribution ought to he attended to ; because some ancient artificers, having laid the beams so that they ran over from the inner face of the walls, and projected beyond their external face, filled up the spaces between the beams, and ornamented the cornices and upper parts with wood-work elegantly wrought. They then cut off the ends of the beams that projected over the external face of the wall, flush with its

face; the appearance whereof being unpleasing, they fixed, on the end of each beam so cut, indented tablets, similar to the triglyphs now in use, and painted them with a waxen composition of a blue colour, so that the ends of the beams in question might not be unpleasant to the eye. Thus the ends of the timbers covered with tablets, indented as just mentioned, gave rise to the triglyph and metopa in the Doric order. Others, in subsequent works, suffered the rafters’ feet above each triglyph, to run over, and hollowed out the projecting inferior surface. So, from the arrangement of beams, arose the invention of triglyphs ; and, from the projection of the rafters, the use of mutuli under the corona. On which latter account it is observable, that in works of stone and marble the carving of the mutuli is inclined, in imitation of the feet of rafters, whose slope is necessary to carry off the water. Hence we have the imitation of the earliest works to account for the Doric triglyph and mutulus, and not, as some have erroneously said, from the circumstance of triglyphs being introduced as windows ; which could not be the case, inasmuch as they are placed on external angles, and immediately over columns, in both which situations windows would be absurd in the highest degree, for the tye at the angles of buildings would be ^entirely destroyed, if occupied by windows; and therefore the dentils of the Ionic orders might as properly be seen to occupy the places of windows, if the spaces occupied by triglyphs have an origin of such a nature. The intervals, moreover, between dentils, as well as those between triglyphs, are called meto- pse. Besides, the Greeks, by the word ottou, signify the beds of the beams, which we call cava columbaria : thus the space between two beams obtained the name of a metopa. As in works of the Doric order triglyphs and mutuli were first used, so in Ionic works the use of dentils was first introduced; for as the mutuli bear a resemblance to the projecting feet of the principal rafters, so,

86 in the Ionic order, the dentils imitate the projection of the common rafters. Hence the Greeks never placed dentils below the mutuli, because the feet of common rafters cannot he below those of principal rafters. For a design must he anomalous, when that which ought to he above the principal rafters is placed below them. The ancients, therefore, neither approved nor used mutuli nor dentils in the cornices of their pediments, but coronse simply; because neither principal nor common rafters tail on the front of a pediment, neither can they project beyond it, their direction being towards the eaves. Their opinion, therefore, evidently was, that a distribution would not be correct in a copy which could not exist in the prototype. For the perfection of all works depends on their fitness to answer the end proposed, and on principles resulting from a consideration of Nature herself, and they approved those only which, by strict analogy, were borne out by the appearance of utility. Their principles were thus established, and they have left us the symmetry and proportion of each order. Following their steps, I have already spoken of the Ionic and Corinthian orders : I shall now proceed to give a succinct account of the Doric order, and its most approved proportion. CHAPTER III. OF THE DORIC PROPORTIONS. Some ancient architects have asserted that sacred buildings ought not to be constructed of the Doric order, because false and incongruous arrangements arise in the use of it. Such were the opinions of Tarchesius, Pitheus, and Hermogenes. The latter, indeed, after having prepared a large quantity of marble for a Doric temple,

changed his mind, and, with the materials collected, made it of the Ionic order, in honor of Bacchus. It is not because this order wants beauty, antiquity (genus), or dignity of form, but because its detail is shackled and inconvenient, from the arrangement of the triglyphs, and the formation of the sofite of the corona (lacunaria). It is necessary that the triglyphs stand centrally over the columns, and that the metopse which are between the triglyphs should be as broad as high. Over the columns, at the angles of the building, the triglyphs are set at the extremity of the frieze, and not over the centre of the columns. In this case the metopse adjoining the angular triglyphs are not square, but wider than the others by half the width of the triglyph. Those who resolve to make the metopse equal, contract the extreme interco- lumniation half a triglyph’s width. It is, however, a false method, either to lengthen the metopse or to contract the intercolumniations; and the ancients, on this account, appear to have avoided the use of the Doric order in their sacred buildings. I will, however, proceed to explain the method of using it, as instructed therein by my masters ; so that if any one desire it, he will here find the proportions detailed, and so amended, that he may, without a defect, be able to design a sacred building of the Doric order. The front of a Doric temple, when columns are to be used, must, if tetrastylos, be divided into twenty-eight parts ; if hexastylos, into forty- four parts; one of which parts is called a module, by the Greeks s : from the module so found the distribution of all the parts is regulated. The thickness ofi the columns is to be equal to two modules, their height equal to fourteen. The height of the capital one module, its breadth one module and a sixth. Let the height of the capital be divided into three parts; then one of those parts is to be assigned for the abacus and its cyma- tium, another for the echinus, with its fillets; the third for the hypotrachelium. The diminution of the column

88 is to be as directed for the Ionic order in the third book. The architrave or epistylium, with its tsenia and guttse, is to be one module in height; the tsenia is the seventh part of a module ; the length of the guttse under the taenia plumb with the triglyphs, and including the fillet, the sixth part of a module. The width of the soffit of the architrave is to correspond with the thickness of the column at the hypotrachelium. Over the architrave triglyphs are placed, with metopae one module and a half high, and one module wide on the face. They are to be distributed so, that as well over the columns at the angles, as over the intermediate columns, they may stand above the two central quarters of the columns. Two are to be placed in each intercolumniation, except in the central one of the pronaos and posticum, in which three are to be set; because, by making the middle inter- columniations wider, a freer passage will be given to those who approach the statues of the gods. The width of a triglyph is divided into six parts, of which five are left in the middle, and of the two halves of the remaining part, one is placed on the right and the other on the left extremity. In the centre a flat surface is left, called the femur (thigh), by the Greeks p/^pos, on each side of which channels are cut, whose faces form a right angle; and on the right and left of these are other femora ; and, lastly, at the angles are the two half channels. The triglyphs being thus arranged, the metopse, which are the spaces between the triglyphs, are to be as long as they are high. On the extreme angles are semi-metopse half a module wide. In this way all the defects in the me- topae, intercolumniations, and lacunaria, will be remedied. The capitals of the triglyphs are to be made the sixth part of a module. Over the capitals of the triglyphs the corona is to be laid, whose projection is one half and a sixth part of a module, with a Doric cymatium over it, and another above it, so that, with the cymatia, the corona is one half of a module high. In the soffit of the

89 corona, perpendicularly over tlie triglyplis and centres of the metopae, are arranged guttse and sinkings. The former, so as to have six guttse appearing in front, and three on the return: the remaining spaces, which occur from the increased width of the metopae beyond that of the triglyphs, are left plain or sculptured with representations of thunderbolts, and near the edge of the corona a channel is cut, called a scotia. The remaining parts, the tympana, cymae, and coronae, are to be executed similar to those described for Ionic buildings. The above is the method used in diastyle works. If the work be systyle, with a monotriglyph : the front of the building, when tetrastylos, is to be divided into twenty-three parts ; when hexastylos, into thirty-fiveof  these, one part is taken for a module ; according to which, as above directed, the work is to be set out. Thus, over the epistylia are two metopae and one triglyph, and in the angles a space will be left equal to half a triglyph. The middle part, under the pediment, will be equal to the space of three triglyphs and three metopae, in order that the central intercolumniation may give room to those approaching the temple, and present a more dignified view of the statue of the god. Over the capitals of the triglyphs a corona is to be placed, with a Doric cymatium below, as * above described, and another above. The corona, also, together with the cymatia, is to be half a module high. The soffit of the corona, perpendicularly over the triglyphs and centres of the metopae, is to have guttee and sinkings, and the other parts as directed for the diastyle. It is necessary that the columns should be wrought in twenty faces, which, if plane, will have twenty angles; but if channelled, they are to be so formed, that a square being described, whose side is equal to that of the channel or flute, if, in the middle of the square, the point of a pair of compasses be placed, and a segment of a circle be drawn, touching the angles of the square, such segment will determine their sinking. Thus is the Doric

90 column properly chamfered. In. respect of the additional thickness in the middle thereof, as mentioned in the third hook, respecting* Ionic columns, reference must he made to that place. As the external symmetry of Corinthian, Doric, and Ionic edifices has been explained, it is necessary to give directions for the interior arrangements of the cell and pronaos. CHAPTER IV. OF THE INTERIOR OF THE CELL AND THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE PRONAOS. The length of a temple must he twice its width. The cell itself is to he in length one-fourth part more than the breadth, including the wall in which the doors are placed. The remaining three parts run forward to the antse of the walls of the pronaos, which antse are to he of the same thickness as the columns. If the temple be broader than twenty feet, two columns are interposed between the two antse, to separate the pteroma from the pronaos. The three intercolumniations between the antse and the columns may be enclosed with fence work, either of marble or of wood, so, however, that they have doors in them for access to the pronaos. If the width be greater than forty feet, columns opposite to those which are between the antse, are placed towards the inner part, of the same height as those in front, but their thickness is to be diminished as follows. If those in front are an eighth part of their height in thickness, these are to be one ninth; and if the former are a ninth, or a tenth, the latter are to be proportionally diminished. For where the air does not play round them, the diminution thus made will not be perceived; lest, however, they should appear i

91 slenderer, when the flutes of the external columns he twenty-four in number, these may have twenty-eight, or even thirty-two. Thus, what is taken from the absolute mass of the shaft, will be imperceptibly aided by the number of the flutes, and though of different thicknesses, they will have the appearance of being equal. This arises from the eye embracing a greater number of surfaces, and thence producing on the mind the effect of a larger body. For if two columns, equally thick, one of them without flutes, and the other fluted, are measured round with lines, and the line is passed over the flutes and their fillets, though the columns are of equal thickness, the lines which girt them will not be equal, for that which passes over the fillets and flutes will of course be the longest. This being the case, it is not improper in confined and enclosed situations to make the columns of slenderer proportions, when we have the adoption of the flutes to assist us. The thickness of the walls of the cell must depend on the magnitude of the work, taking care, however, that the antse are the same thickness as the columns. If built in the ordinary way, they are to be of small stones, very carefully laid, but if of square stone or marble the pieces should be chiefly small and of equal size, because then, the upper stones coming over the middle of the joint below them, bind the work together and give it strength; fillets of lime used in pointing the joints and beds give the work an agreeable appearance.

92 CHAPTER Y. OF THE DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF TEMPLES. If there he nothing to prevent it, and the use of the edifice allow it, the temples of the immortal gods should have such an aspect, that the statue in the cell may have its face towards the west, so that those who enter to sacrifice, or to make offerings, may have their faces to the east as well as to the statue in the temple. Thus suppliants, and those performing their vows, seem to have the temple, the east, and the deity, as it were, looking on them at the same moment. Hence all altars of the gods should he placed towards the east. But if the nature of the place do not permit this, the temple is to he turned as much as possible, so that the greater part of the city may he seen from it. Moreover, if temples he built on the banks of a river, as those in Egypt on the Nile, they should face the river. So, also, if temples of the gods be erected on the road side, they should be placed in such a manner that those passing by.may look towards them, and make their obeisance. CHAPTER VI. OF THE PROPORTIONS OF THE DOORS OF TEMPLES. The following are the rules for door-ways of temples, and for their dressings (antepagmenta). First the species is to be considered: this is Doric, Ionic, or Attic. The Doric is constructed with these proportions. The top of the cornice, which is above the upper dressing, is to be level with the top of the capitals in the pronaos. The aperture of the door is determined as follows. The height from the pavement to the lacunaria is to be di-

vided into three p dirts and a half, of which two constitute the height of the doors. The height thus obtained is to be divided into twelve parts, of which five and a half are given to the width of the bottom part of the door. This is diminished towards the top, equal to one-third of the dressing, if the height he not more than sixteen feet. From sixteen feet to twenty-five the upper part of the opening is contracted one-fourth part of the dressing. From twenty-five to thirty feet the upper part is contracted one-eight of the dressing. Those that are higher should have their sides vertical. The thickness of the dressings in front is to he equal to one-twelfth of the height of the door, and they are to diminish towards the top a fourteenth part of their width. The height of the architrave is to he equal to the upper part of the dressing. The cymatium is to he a sixth part of the dressing; its projection equal to its thickness. The cymatium is to be sculptured in the Lesbian form, with an astragal. Above the cymatium of the architrave of the dressing (supercilium), the frieze (hyper thy rum), is placed, and it is to have a Doric cymatium, with a Lesbian astragal, in low relief. Over this the corona is placed, unornamented, and with a cymatium. Its projection is to equal the height of the supercilium placed over the architrave of the dressing. On the right and left, projectures are made ; and the cymatia of the dressings are connected by a mitre. If the doors are Ionic, their height is to be regulated as in those that are Doric. Their width is found by dividing the height into two parts and a half, and taking one and a half for the width below. The diminution is to be as in the Doric door-way. The width of the dressings is to be a fourteenth part of the height of the aperture; the cymatium a sixth part of their width; the remainder, deducting the cymatium, is to he divided into twelve parts, three of which are given to the first fascia, with the astragal, four to the second, and five to the third. The fasciae, with the astragal, run quite round

94 the dressings. The upper members of the door-way are the same as those of the Doric. The trusses (ancones), or prothyrides, which are carved on the right and left, reach to the bottom of the level of the architrave, exclusive of the leaf. Their width on the face is one-third of the dressing, and at the bottom one-fourth part less. The wooden doors are to be so put together, that the hinge styles (scapi cardinales) maybe one-twelfth of the height of the aperture. The pannels (tympana) between the styles are to be three out of twelve parts in width. The arrangement of the rails is to be such, that when the height is divided into five parts, two are given to the upper and three to the lower rail. In the centre the middle rails (medii impages) are placed; the others are disposed above and below. The width of the rail is to be one-third of the pannel, and its cymatium a sixth part of the rail itself. The width of the inner styles is one- half of the rail, and the raising (replum) four-sixths of the rail. The styles nearest the dressings are made one- half of the rail. If the doors are folding, the height remains the same, but the width is to be increased. If in four folds the height is to be increased. The Attic doors are made of the same proportions as the Doric, except that, in the dressings, the fasciae return within the cymatium ; and these are proportioned so, that exclusive of the cymatium, they are to be two-sevenths. These doors are not to be inlaid (cerostrota), nor in two folds, but single folded, and to open outwards. I have explained, to the best of my power, the proportions used in setting out Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian temples, according to the approved methods. I shall now treat of the arrangement of Tuscan temples, and how they ought to be built.

CHAPTER VII. OF THE TUSCAN PROPORTIONS: OF CIRCULAR TEMPLES, AND OTHER SPECIES. The length of the site of the temple intended, must be divided into six parts, wherefrom subtracting one part, the width thereof is obtained. The length is then divided into two parts, of which the furthest is assigned to the cell, that next the front to the reception of the columns. The above width is to be divided into ten parts, of which, three to the right and three to the left are for the smaller cells, or for the alee, if such are required : the remaining four are to be given to the central part. The space before the cells in the pronaos, is to have its columns so arranged, that those at the angles are to correspond with the antse of the external walls: the two central ones, opposite the walls, between the antse and the middle of the temple, are to be disposed, so that between the antse and the above columns, and in that direction, others may be placed. Their thickness below is to be one-seventh of their height: their height one-third of the width of the temple, and their thickness at top is to be one-fourth less than their thickness at bottom. Their bases are to be half a diameter in height. The plinths, which are to be circular, are half the height of the base, with a torus and fillet on them as high as the plinth. The height of the capital is to be half a diameter. The width of the abacus is equal to the lower diameter of the column. The height of the capital must be divided into three parts, of which one is assigned to the plinth or abacus, another to the echinus, the third to the hypotrachelium, with its apophyge. Over the columns coupled beams are laid of such height as the magnitude of the work may require. Their width must be equal to that of the hypotrachelium at the top

96 of the column, and they are to he so coupled together with dovetailed dowels as to leave a space of two inches between them. For if they are laid touching each other, and the air does not play round them, they heat and soon rot. Above the beams and walls the mutuli project one-fourth the height of the column. In front of these members are fixed, and over them the tympanum of the pediment, either of masonry or timber. Above the pediment the ridge-piece (columen), rafters (can- therii), and purlines (templa), are distributed so that the water may drip therefrom on three sides. Circular temples are also constructed, of which some are monop- teral, having columns without a cell; others are called peripteral. Those without a cell have a raised floor (tribunal), and an ascent thereto equal to one-third of their diameter. On the pedestals (stylohatse) columns are raised, whose height is equal to the diameter which the pedestal occupies, and their thickness, including the bases and capitals, one-tenth part of their height. The height of the architrave is half a diameter; the frieze and members over it are to he proportioned according to the directions to that effect which have been given in the third book. But if the building he peripteral, two steps, and then the pedestals are built thereunder ; the wall of the cell is raised at a distance from the pedestals of about one-fifth of the whole diameter, and in the middle is left an opening for the door. The clear diameter of the cell within the walls, is to he equal to the height of the columns above the pedestals. The columns round the cell are proportioned as above directed. At the centre of the roof, the height of it is equal to half the diameter of the work, exclusive of the flower. The flower without the pyramid is to equal in dimensions the capitals of the columns. The other parts are to he similar in proportions and symmetry to those already described. Other species of temples are also erected, regulated on the same principles, hut with a dif-

97 ferent arrangement of parts, such as the temple of Castor in the Circus Flaminius, and of Beardless Jupiter (Ve- jovis), between the two groves. As also, though more ingeniously contrived, that of Diana Aricina, with columns on each flank of the pronaos. The first temples built similar to that of Castor in the Circus, were those of Minerva on the Acropolis of Athens, and of Pallas at Sunium in Attica, the proportions of which are similar. The length of the cells is double their breadth, and in other respects, those symmetries which are used in the fronts are preserved on the sides. Others, with an arrangement of columns similar to that observed in Tuscan temples, transfer it to Corinthian and Ionic designs ; for in some examples, instead of the antse which run out from the pronaos, two columns-are substituted, and thus Tuscan and Greek principles are mixed. Others removing the walls of the cell, and placing them between the intercolumniations of the pteroma, give more space to the cell by their removal, and by preserving in other respects the same proportions and symmetry, seem to have invented another species which may be called pseudoperipteral. These different sorts of temples are dependent on the sacrifices performed in them ; for temples to the gods are not all to be constructed in the same manner, the worship and sacred rites of each being different. I have, according to the rules taught to me, explained the different principles on which temples are constructed, the different orders and symmetry of their detail, wherein and how they respectively differ; and this I have written to the best of my ability. I shall now describe the altars of the immortal gods, and their situation as adapted to sacrifices. F

98 CHAPTER VIII. OF ALTARS TO THE GODS. The aspect of altars should be to the east, and they should always he lower than the statues in the temple, so that the supplicants and those that sacrifice, in looking towards the deity, may stand more or less inclined, as the reverence to be shewn may proportionally require. Hence altars are thus contrived; the heights of those of Jupiter and the celestial gods are to he ashigh as they may conveniently be; those of Vesta, the Earth, and the Sea are made lower. On these principles, altars in the middle of temples are fitly proportioned. In this book the method of designing temples is shewn ; in the following, rules will be given for the arrangements to be observed in public buildings.

i : in '■W- _ M&l ■HS  pre- erf # 1 CHAPTER IX. OF THE POETICOS AND PASSAGES BEHIND THE SCENES. Behind the scenes porticos are to he built; to which, in case of sudden showers, the people may retreat from the theatre, and also sufficiently capacious for the rehearsals of the chorus: such are the porticos of Pompey, of Eumenes at Athens, and of the temple of Bacchus; and on the left passing from the theatre, is the Odeum, which, in Athens, Pericles ornamented with stone' columns, and with the masts and yards of ships, from the Persian spoils. This was destroyed hy tire in the Mi- thridatic war, and restored hy king Ariobarzanes. At Smyrna was the Strategeum: at Tralles were porticos on each side over the stadium, as in the scenes of theatres. In short, in all cities which possess skilful architects, porticos and walks are placed about the theatre, and these ought to he constructed double, with their exterior columns of the Doric order, whose architraves, and cornices are to he wrought after the Doric method. Their width is to he thus proportioned: the height of the exterior columns is equal to the distance from the lower part of the shaft of the exterior columns to that of those in the middle, and from them to the walls which surround the walks of the portico is an equal distance. The middle range of columns is one fifth part higher than the exterior range ; and is of the Ionic or Corinthian order. The proportions and symmetry of these columns are not to be guided by the rules delivered for those of sacred buildings. For the style used in the temples of the gods should he dignified; whereas, in porticos and similar works, it may he of a lighter character. If, therefore, the columns be of the Doric order, their height, including the capitals, is to be divided into fifteen parts, of which one is taken as a module. By this

118 \ all the work is set out, making the thickness of the lower part of the column equal to two modules. The inter- columniation is of five modules and a half. The height of a column, exclusive of the capital, fourteen modules; the height of the capital one module, the width of it two modules and a sixth. The proportions of the rest of the work are to be the same as those described for sacred buildings in the fourth book. If Ionic columns be used, the shaft, exclusive of the base and capital, is to he divided into eight parts and a half, of which one is assigned to the thickness of the column. The base, with its plinth, is half a module high ; and the formation of the capital is to be as shewn in the third hook. If Corinthian, the shaft and base are to be the same as the Ionic; hut the capital is to be proportioned as directed in the fourth book ; and the addition on the pedestal is made by means of the scamilli impares, mentioned in the third book. The architraves, coronse, and all the other parts, are set out in proportion to the columns as explained in the foregoing hooks. The central space between the porticos should he ornamented with verdure, inasmuch as hypaethral walks are very healthy; first, in respect of the eyes, because the air from green plants being light and volatile, insinuates itself into the body when in motion, clears the sight, and, removing the gross humours from the eyes, leaves the vision clear and distinct. Moreover, when the body is heated by the exercise of walking, the air, extracting its humours, diminishes corpulency, dissipating that which is superabundant in the body. That this is the case, may be proved by observing, that from fountains in covered places, or those which are under ground, no moist vapours rise; whilst in open places exposed to the air, when the rising sun darts his rays upon the earth, he raises the vapours from humid and marshy places, and, gathering them into masses, carries them into the air. If, therefore, in open places, the noxious humours of bodies are carried off by

119 the air, as they are from the earth hy means of clouds, there can be no doubt of the necessity of making spacious and pleasant walks open to the air in every city. That they may always be dry and free from mud, the following method must he adopted. They must be dug out and drained to the lowest possible level; and on the right and left sewers must be constructed; and in the walls thereof, towards the walk, drains are laid, with an inclination to the sewer. When this is done, the place is filled in with charcoal; over which the walks are strewed with gravel, and levelled. Thus, from the natural porosity of the charcoal, and the inclination of the drains towards the sewer, the quantity of water is carried off, and the passages remain dry and unaffected hy the moisture. In these places the ancients also made depots for the reception of things necessary for the use of the city. For in case of the city being under blockade, all things are more easily provided than wood. Salt is with facility laid in beforehand; corn, from the public or private stores, is soon collected ; and the want of that is remedied hy the use of garden herbs, flesh, or pulse. Water is obtained either hy digging new wells, or hy collecting it from the roofs of buildings; hut wood, which is absolutely necessary for cooking the food, is provided with difficulty and trouble; and that which is slowly procured is quickly consumed. In such times these walks are opened, and an allowance distributed to the tribes, according to their numbers. Thus they are conducive to two good purposes; to health in time of peace, and to preservation in time of war. If walks are provided after these directions not only behind the scene of the theatre, but also adjoining the temples of all the gods, they will be of great utility in every city. As they have been sufficiently explained, the method of arranging the different parts of baths will now follow.

120 CHAPTER X. OF THE ARRANGEMENT AND PARTS OF BATHS. First, as warm a spot as possible is to be selected, tbat is to say, one sheltered from the north and north east. The hot and tepid baths are to receive their light from the winter west; but, if the nature of the place prevent that, at all events from the south, because the hours of bathing are principally from noon to evening. Care must be taken that the warm baths of the women and men adjoin, and have the same aspect; in which case the same furnace and vessels will serve both. The caldrons over the furnaces are to be three in number, one for hot water, another for tepid water, and a third for cold water : and they must be so arranged, that the hot water which runs out of the heated vessel, may be replaced by an equal quantity from the tepid vessel, which in like manner is supplied from the cold vessel, and that the arched cavities in which they stand may be heated by one fire. The floors of the hot baths are to be made as follows. First, the bottom is paved with tiles of a foot and a half inclining towards the furnace, so that if a ball be thrown into it, it will not remain therein, but roll back to the mouth of the furnace ; thus the flame will better spread under the floor. Upon this, piers of eight inch bricks are raised, at such a distance from each other, that tiles of two feet may form their covering. The piers are to be two feet in height, and are to be laid in clay mixed with hair, on which the above-mentioned two feet tiles are placed, which carry the pavement. The ceilings, if of masonry, will be preferable ; if, however, they are of timber, they should be plastered on the under side, which must be done as follows. Iron rods, or arcs, are prepared and suspended by iron hooks from the floor as close as pos-

121 sible. These rods or arcs are at such distances from each other, that tiles, without knees, may rest on and he home by every two ranges, and thus the whole vaulting depending on the iron may he perfected. The upper parts of the joints are stopped with clay and hair. The under side towards the pavement is first plastered with pounded tiles and lime, and then finished with stucco or fine plastering. If the vaulting of hot baths is made double it will he better, because the moisture of the steam cannot then affect the timber, hut will he condensed between the two arches. The size of baths must depend on the number of persons who frequent them. Their proportions are as follow: their width is to he two-thirds of their length, exclusive of the space round the bathing vessel (schola labri) and the gutter round it (alveus). The bathing vessel (labrum) should he lighted from above, so that the bye standers may not cast any shadow thereon, and thereby obstruct the light. The schola labri ought to he spacious, so that those who are waiting for their turn may he properly accommodated. The width of the alveus between the wall of the lahrum and the parapet must not be less than six feet, so that it may be commodious after the reduction of two feet, which are allotted to the lower step and the cushion. The laconi- cum and sudatories are to adjoin the tepid apartment, and their height to the springing of the curve of the hemisphere is to be equal to their width. An opening is left in the middle of the dome from which a brazen shield is suspended by chains, capable of being so lowered and raised as to regulate the temperature. It should be circular, that the intensity of the flame and "heat may be equally diffused from the centre throughout. G

122 CHAPTER XI. OF THE PALESTRA. Though not used by the people of Italy, it seems proper that I should explain the form of the palaestra, and describe the mode in which it was constructed by the Greeks. The square or oblong peristylia of palaestrae, have a walk round them which the Greeks call SiavX o?, two stadia in circuit: three of the sides are single porticos : the fourth, which is that on the south side, is to be double, so that when showers fall in windy weather, the drops may not drive into the inner part of it. In the three porticos are large recesses (exedrae) with seats therein, whereon the philosophers, rhetoricians, and others who delight in study, may sit and dispute. In the double portico the following provision is to be made: the epheheum is to be in the middle, which is in truth nothing more than a large exedra with seats, and longer by one-third than its width, on the right is the coriceum, immediately adjoining which is the conisterium, near which, in the angle of the portico, is the cold bath, which the Greeks call Xovrpov. On the left of the ephe- beum is the elseothesium, adjoining that is the frigida- rium, whence a passage leads to the propigneum in the angle of the portico. Near, but more inward, on the side of the frigidarium, is placed the vaulted sudatory, whose length is double its width ; on one side of this is the laconicum, constructed as before described : on the other side is the hot bath. The peristylia of the palaestra are to be carefully set out as above mentioned. Ex-’ teriorly three porticos are constructed, one through which those who come out of the palaestra pass; and stadial ones on the right and left, of which, that towards the north is double, and of considerable width. The other is single, and so formed that as well on

123 the side next the wall, as on that where the columns stand, there are margins for paths of not less than ten feet, the centre part is sunk one foot and a half from the path, to which there is an ascent of two steps ; the sunken part is not to he less than twelve feet in width. Thus, those who in their clothing walk round the paths, will not be incommoded by the anointed wrestlers who are practising. This species of portico is called xystus (iva-rbs)  by the Greeks ; for the wrestlers exercise in covered stadia in the winter time. Xysti ought, between the two porticos, to have groves or plantations, with walks between the trees and seat of cemented work. On the sides of the xystus and double portico are open walks which the Greeks call -jrepiSpo/xiSes, but with us they are termed xysti, on which the athletse exercise themselves, when the weather is fine, in the winter. Behind the xystus the stadium is set out, of such dimensions that a great number of people may commodiously behold the contending wrestlers. I have now given rules for the proper distribution of such buildings as are within the walls. CHAPTER XII. OF HARBOURS AND OTHEE BUILDINGS IN WATEE. I must not omit to speak of the formation of harbours, but explain in what manner ships are secured therein in stormy weather. If they are naturally well situated, and have rocks or long promontories jutting out, which from the shape of the place, form curves or angles, they are of the greatest utility; because, in that case, nothing more is necessary than to construct porticos and arsenals round them, or passages to the markets ; and then erect a tower on each side, wherefrom chains may be sus-

124 pended across by means of machinery. But, if the place be not thus fitted by nature, nor secure for ships in stormy weather, and there be no river there to prevent it, but on one side there, is a proper shore, then on the other side, by means of building or heaps of stones, a projection is run out, and in this the enclosures of harbours are formed. Building in the sea is thus executed. That powder is procured, which is found in the country between Cumee and the promontory of Minerva, and is mixed with the water in the proportion of two parts thereof to one of lime. Then, in the place selected, dams are formed in the water, of oaken piles tied together with chain pieces, which are driven firmly into the bottom. Between the ranges of piles, below the level of the water, the bed is dug out and levelled, and the work carried up with stones and mortar, compounded as above directed, till the wall fills the vacant space of the dam. If, however, from the violence of the waves and open sea the dams cannot be kept together, then on the edge of the main land, a foundation for a wall is constructed of the greatest possible strength ; this foundation is laid horizontally throughout, rather less than half its length; the remainder, which is towards the shore, is made to overhang. Then, on the side towards the water, and on the flanks round the foundation, margins, projecting a foot and a half, are brought up to the level already mentioned. The overhanging part is filled up underneath with sand, brought up level with the foundation. On the level bed thus prepared, as large a pier as possible is built, which must remain for at least two months to set. The margin which incloses the sand is then removed, and the sand being washed away by the action of the waves causes the fall of the mass into the sea, and by a repetition of this expedient the work may be carried forward into the sea. When the place does not afford the powder named, the following method is to be adopted.

125 Double dams are constructed, well connected with planks and chain pieces, and the cavity between them is filled up with clay and marsh weeds well rammed down. When rammed down and squeezed as close as possible, the water is emptied out with screw pumps or water wheels, and the place is emptied and dried, and the foundations excavated. If the bottom be of loose texture, it must be dug out till a solid bottom is come to, wider than the wall about to be erected, and the wall is then built of stone, lime, and sand. But if the bottom be very soft, alder, olive, or oak piles, previously charred, must be driven, and the intervals between them filled with charcoal, as directed above for the foundations of theatres and walls. The wall is then raised with square stones, the joints of which are to be as long as possible, in order that the middle stones may be well tied in. The inside of the wall is then filled with rubble or masonry; and on this, even a tower might be erected. When this is completed, the arsenals are to be constructed chiefly with a northern aspect; for if they are to the south, the heat will generate and nourish the rot, the worm, the ship worm, and other noxious insects ; and timber should be sparingly used in these buildings on account of fire. No rule can be given for the size, but they must be suited to receive the largest ships, so that, if drawn ashore, there may be plenty of room for them. In this book, as far as it has occurred to me, I have treated of the public buildings necessary for the use of a city: in that following, I shall treat of the convenience and symmetry of private houses.

tyv/ th^ryr l ? !ioo 9Fe ■■ stftlir ■ ; f f r rfo^; iU T iivno 3ii.f b/lii y;3f>uiq xiiim- I) ;“fj aiii&fq : rrJ ^: r .:,y / "if •. rr j! rfvr -Ml ft :0f-, 'insfor/jf-- f: >nn r>-& ol> Li; '..t  oarer u.tCJJ' t ? -T •' '. ,■ •: i; Q fF.'fqrti j rn  ox!j f, -r. -il slli - fy. i-' ;>• ■ a4i ir ; . *' * •'A*': h'r, ,y , '--Tj / . ; t rt . v >5*L : ;->; .f=j > < : /n -; Fr.ir.y ' -tin ‘in  f-. r J - a » Ifji .ifro }-ifh 'Off' V - -  j - , cl ‘lic-d. ■  Im."- . ;; ••  i# t *ri' r :r /•;. ;r " - f "J,-. .. . fjf: ,i;: ' /'f» / ’diff •; •. '-fr ■■ '  y.,.: : £?. ■ ' ; rmili arris'..- • iT'- :iiiy ■<&& • 'f ff  ’ U ; A[ *¥^ *•; .^iU UM'-ly*, ■ -. f>’'%T;K;T'> ’ **?[ ' .V f ; ,'T- V r -. , t --,c -.■  V ■* ■•■"■' .. ^ v». 'io *\ .: “• v'V>tib fk - ■:• -' ami 7 i ; ii!) ' /!' ' Txdio'h'rw -. m-iov?' qulk 0i q l■••>• '; v?.;. : :hfu>a ixf Jblxhi -a t nil iiH.afl o4 i.-aaifrj ou iei/m -. ; _ m ; ■■!■• • •-} *' /'iTf 0'F...'J UWtftf* V 5 U:££J .'^ -of{- if «yi ix£ yi .sitMMf ?Jtii 'ft* • oilmans &&; " it* L :  y.-.usi I t 1 ii 5 i 770 lk>l ifil 4 -  Yii:» 8 ^0 .yof uoii bjivvhq [>a4 iK»fH>i:ie? ■■ '■ ■- - ' :•■-.■ ' •:, ;•■ ^ ■•• lif ■ ' '^4 *.;■ H it; •:■■■•'■. ' - ■ n.- .•. /,.... ■ ■ .-A; ' "i : ; ?«wr >4

[l&zsSaai london / Lockwood Sc C°, y StationersHall -Court, Z.udgate Hill.

THE ARCHITECTURE OF MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO. BOOK THE SIXTH. INTRODUCTION. Aristippus, the Socratic philosopher, shipwrecked on the coast of Rhodes, perceiving some geometrical diagrams thereon, is reported to have exclaimed to his companions, “ Be of good courage, I see marks of civilization: ” and straightway making for the city of Rhodes, he arrived at the Gymnasium; where, disputing on philosophical subjects, he obtained such honours, that he not only provided for himself, but furnished clothing and food to his companions. When his companions had completed their arrangements for returning home, and Risked what message he wished to send to his friends, he desired them to say: that the possessions and provision to be made for children should be those which can be preserved in case of shipwreck ; inasmuch as those things are the real supports of life which the chances of fortune, the changes of public affairs, and the devastation of war, cannot injure. Thus, also, Theophrastus, following up the sentiment that the learned ought to be more honoured than the rich, says, “ that the learned man is the only person who is not a stranger in foreign countries, nor friendless when he has lost his relations; but that in every state he

128 is a citizen, and that he can look upon a change of fortune without fear. But he who thinks himself secured by the aid of wealth, and not of learning, treads on slippery ground, and leads an unstable and insecure life.” Epicurus also says, that fortune is of little assistance to the wise, since all that is of consequence or necessary may he obtained by the exercise of the mind and understanding. The poets, not less than the philosophers, have argued in this way; and those who formerly wrote the Greek comedies delivered the same sentiments in verse ; as Euphrates, Chionides, Aristophanes, and above all, Alexis, who said, that the Athenians deserved particular commendation, since, inasmuch as the laws of all the Greeks’make it imperative on children to support their parents, those of the Athenians are only obligatory on those children who have been instructed, by the care of their parents, in some art. Such as possess the gifts of fortune are easily deprived of them: but when learning is once fixed in the mind, no age removes it, nor is its stability affected during the whole course of life. I therefore feel myself under infinite obligations, and am grateful to my parents, who, adopting the practice of the Athenians, took care that I should be taught an art, and one of such a nature that it cannot be practised without learning and a general knowledge of the sciences. Since, then, by my parents’ care, and by the instruction of masters, I had the means afforded me of acquiring knowledge, and was naturally delighted with literary and philosophical subjects, I laid up those stores in my mind, from the use of which I enjoy the advantage of wanting no more, and the value of riches consists in having nothing to wish for. But some thinking, perhaps, lightly of these things, suppose those only are wise who have plenty of money. Hence, many, aiming at that end alone, have, by the aid of their assurance, acquired notoriety from their riches. But I, Caesar, have not sought to amass wealth by the practice of my art, having been rather contented with a small

129 fortune and reputation, than desirous of abundance accompanied by a want of reputation. It is true that I have acquired but little; yet I still hope, by this publication, to become known to posterity. Neither is it wonderful that I am known but to a few. Other architects canvass, and go about soliciting employment, but my preceptors instilled into me a sense of the propriety of being requested, and not of requesting, to be entrusted, inasmuch the ingenuous man will blush and feel shame in asking a favour; for the givers of a favour and not the receivers, are courted. What must he suspect who is solicited by another to be entrusted with the expenditure of his money, but that it is done for the sake of gain and emolument. Hence the ancients entrusted their works to those architects only who were of good family and well brought up; thinking it better to trust the modest, than the bold and arrogant, man. These artists only instructed their own children or relations, having regard to their integrity, so that property might be safely committed to their charge. When, therefore, I see this noble science in the hands of the unlearned and unskilful, of men not only ignorant of architecture, but of every thing relative to buildings, I cannot blame proprietors, who, relying on their own intelligence, are their own architects ; since, if the business is to be conducted by the unskilful, there is at least more satisfaction in laying out money at one’s own pleasure, rather than at that of another person. No one thinks of practising at home any art (as that of a shoemaker or fuller, for instance, or others yet easier) except that of an architect; and that because many who profess the art are not really skilled in it, but are falsely called architects. These things have induced me to compose a treatise on architecture and its principles, under an idea that it would be acceptable to all persons. As in the fifth book I treated on the construction of public works, I shall in this explain the arrangement and symmetry of private buildings. g 3

130 CHAPTER I. OF THE SITUATION OF BUILDINGS ACCORDING TO THE NATURE OF DIFFERENT PLACES. These are properly designed, when due regard is had to the country and climate in which they are erected. For the method of building which is suited to Egypt would he very improper in Spain, and that in use in Pontus would he absurd at Rome : so in other parts of the world a style suitable to one climate, would he very unsuitable to another; for one part of the world is under the sun’s course, another is distant from it, and another, between the two, is temperate. Since, therefore, from the position of the heaven in respect of the earth, from the inclination of the zodiac and from the sun’s course, the earth varies in temperature in different parts, so the form of buildings must be varied according to the temperature of the place, and the various aspects of the heavens. In the north, buildings should be arched, enclosed as much as possible, and not exposed, and it seems proper that they should face the warmer aspects. Those under the sun’s course in southern countries where the heat is oppressive, should be exposed and turned towards the north and east. Thus the injury which nature would effect, is evaded by means of art. So in other parts, due allowance is to be made, having regard to their position, in respect of the heavens. This, however, is determined by consideration of the nature of the place and observations made on the limbs and bodies of the inhabitants. For where the sun acts with moderate heat, it keeps the body at a temperate warmth, where it is hot from the proximity of the sun, all moisture is dried up; lastly, in cold countries which are distant from the south, the moisture is not drawn out by the heat, but the dewy air, insinuating its dampness into the system, increases

131 the size of the body, and makes the voice'more grave. This is the reason why the people of the north are so large in stature, so light in complexion, and have straight red hair, blue eyes, and are full of blood, for they are thus formed by the abundance of the moisture, and the coldness of their country. Those who live near the equator, and are exactly under the sun’s course, are, owing to its power, low in stature, of dark complexion, with curling hair, black eyes, weak legs, deficient in quantity of blood. And this deficiency of blood makes them timid when opposed in battle, but they bear excessive heat and fevers without fear, because their limbs are nourished by heat. Those, however, born in northern countries are timid and weak when attacked by fever, but from their sanguineous habit of body more courageous in battle. The pitch of the voice is various, and of different qualities in different nations. For the eastern and western boundaries round the level of the earth, where the upper is divided from the under part of the world, and the earth appears to be balanced by nature, are designated by a circle which mathematicians call the horizon; keeping this circumstance in mind, from the edge on the northern extremity, let a line be drawn to that above the southern axis, and therefrom another in an oblique direction up to the pole near the northern stars, and we shall immediately perceive the principle of the triangular instrument called by the Greeks o-apftvKrj. Thus the people who live in the region near the lower point, that is in the southern part towards the equator, from the small elevation of the pole have shrill and high toned voices similar to those on the instrument near the angle; next come those whose tone of voice is of lower pitch, such as the people in the central parts of Greece. Thus, proceeding by degrees from the middle to the northern extremity, the voice of the inhabitants gradually becomes of lower pitch. Herein we may perceive how the system of the world is harmonically arranged, by

133 the obliquity of the zodiac from the appropriate tem-_ perature of the sun. Hence those who are in the middle, between the equator and the pole, are gifted with a middle pitch of voice, similar to the tones in the central part of the musical diagram. Advancing to the northern nations, where the pole is more elevated, the people, from an increased quantity of moisture, naturally possess lower toned voices, similar to the hypate and proslambanomenos. And finally, those nations extending from the middle regions to the south have shrill and acute voices similar to the tones of paranete and nete. That the tone of the voice is rendered deeper by the damp nature of a place, and higher by its being of a hot nature, may be proved by the following experiment. Let two vases be selected, both equally baked in a furnace, of equal weight, and yielding the same tone, and one of them be immersed in water and then taken out: let both of them be then struck, and a great difference will be perceived in the tones they yield, as well as an inequality in their weight. Thus it is with the human body; for although all men are born of the same form, and under the same heaven, yet some from the warmth of the climate are shrill in voice, and others from a superabundance of moisture have a low tone of voice. So moreover, from the clearness of the atmosphere, aided also by the intense heat, the southern nations are more ready and quick in expedients : but the northern nations, oppressed by a gross atmosphere, and cooled by the moisture of the air, are of duller intellect. That this is so, may be proved from the nature of serpents, which in the hot season, when the cold is dispelled by the heat, move with great activity, but in the rainy and winter seasons, from the coldness of the air, they become torpid. Hence it is not surprising that man’s intellect should be sharpened by heat and blunted by a cold atmosphere. Though, however, the southern nations are quick in understanding, and sagacious in council, yet in point of

valour they are inferior, for the sun absorbs their animal spirits. Those, on the contrary, who are natives of cold climates are more courageous in war, and fearlessly attack their enemies, though, rushing on without consideration or judgment, their attacks are repulsed and their designs frustrated. Since then, nature herself has provided throughout the world, that all nations should differ according to the variation of the climate, she has also been pleased that in the middle of the earth, and of all nations, the Roman people should he seated; on this account the people of Italy excel in both qualities, strength of body and vigour of mind. For as the planet Jupiter moves through a temperate region between the fiery Mars and icy Saturn, so Italy enjoys a temperate and unequalled climate between the north on one side, and the south on the other. Hence it is, that by stratagem she is enabled to repress the attacks of the barbarians, and by her strength to overcome the subtilty of southern nations. Divine providence has so ordered it that the metropolis of the Roman people is placed in an excellent and temperate climate, whereby they have become the masters of the world. Thus, as it is climate which causes the variety in different countries, and the dispositions of the inhabitants, their stature and qualities being naturally dissimilar, there can be no doubt that the arrangement of buildings should he suitable to the qualities of the nations and people, as nature herself wisely and clearly indicates. To the best of my power I have made general observations on the properties of places as dependent upon nature, and I have given explanations for adapting buildings to the wants of different nations according to the sun’s course and the inclination of the pole. I shall now, therefore, briefly explain the symmetry, as well of the whole, as of the detail of private dwellings.

CHAPTER II. OF THE PROPORTIONS OF PRIVATE BUILDINGS TO SUIT THE NATURE OF THEIR SITES. Nothing requires the architect’s care more than the due proportions of buildings. When the proportions are adjusted, and the dimensions found by calculation, then it is the part of a skilful man to consider the nature of the place, the purpose of the building, and the beauty of it; and either hy diminutions or additions to find expedients, by means of which the appearance may not be injured by the additions to, or diminutions of, the established proportions that may be necessary. For an object under the eye will appear very different from the same object placed above it; in an inclosed space, very different from the same in an open space. In all these matters it requires great judgment to adopt the proper means, since the eye does not always form to itself the true image of an object, and the mind is often deceived by the false impression. Thus in painted scenery, though the surface is a perfect plane, the columns seem to advance forward, the projections of the mutuli are represented, and figures seem to stand out. The oars of ships, also, though the parts immersed in the water are really straight, have the appearance of being broken; those parts only appearing straight which are above the level of the water. This arises from the part immersed in the water reflecting its image in an undulating state up to the surface of the water, through a transparent medium, which, being there agitated, gives the oar a broken appearance. But whether the sight arises from the impression which images make on the eye, or by an effusion of visual rays from the eye, as naturalists contend, it is certain that, in some way or other, the eye is often deceived. Since, then, some images are falsely

135 conveyed, and others appear different from what they really are, I think it beyond doubt, that, according to nature and the circumstances of the place, diminutions or additions should he made, so that no defect may he apparent. To do this, however, is the result of genius, not the result of learning. The proportion of the symmetries is, therefore, to be first settled, in such manner that thereon the necessary changes may he made with certainty. Then the length and breadth of the plan of the work is to he .set out, and the parts thereof; after which, the proportions are adjusted as propriety requires, so that the pleasing arrangement may not he disturbed. The method of effecting this I am now about to describe, and shall begin with the court (cavsedium). CHAPTER III. OF COUETS (CAViEDIA). Thebe are five species of courts; which receive their names from their forms. The Tuscan, Corinthian, the Tetrastylon (with four columns), the Displuviatum (open at top), and the Testudinatum (roofed). The Tuscan cavaedia are those in which the beams across the breadth of the court have trimmers (interpensivse) to them, and valleys (colliquise) from the internal angles of the walls to the angles formed by the junctions of the beams and trimmers. Thus the rain falls into the middle of the court from the eaves of the rafters. In the Corinthian cavsedium, the beams and uncovered middle of the court (compluvium) are as in the foregoing; but the beams around^ are detached from the walls, and rest on columns. The tetrastyle are those wherein columns are placed under the beams at the angles, which give strength and

136 support to the beams ; for thus they are not so liable to sag with their own weight, nor are they loaded by the trimmers. The displuviatum is that in which the water is carried off above the gutter plates (deliquise), which support the body of the roof. These are useful for winter apartments, because the compluvium being upright, the light of the triclinia is not obstructed. Hut they are constantly in want of repair; for the pipes which receive the water from the eaves being against the walls, and not capable of taking, at once, the water which should be carried off, it overflows from the check it meets, and injures the wood-work and walls in this sort of buildings. The roofed court is used when the span is not great, and large dwelling-rooms are made in the floor over it, CHAPTER IY. OF COURTS (ATRIA), WINGS OR AISLES (AL^), THE TABLINUM AND THE PERISTYLIUM. The length and breadth of courts (atria) are regulated in three ways. The first is, when the length is divided into five parts, and three of them are given to the vvidth. The second, when it is divided into three parts, and two are given to the width. The third is, when a square being described whose side is equal to the width, a diagonal line is drawn therein, the length of which is to be equal to the length of the atrium. Their height, to the underside of the beams, is to be one-fourth less than the length; the remaining fourth is assigned for the proportion of the lacunaria and roof above the beams. The width of the alse, on the right and left, when the atrium is from thirty to forty feet long, is to he one-third part thereof. From forty to fifty feet, the length must

137 be divided into three parts and a half; of these, one is given to the alse: hut when the length is from fifty to sixty feet, a fourth part thereof is given to the alse. From sixty to eighty feet, the length is divided into four parts and a half, of which one part is the width of the alas. From eighty feet to one hundred, the length is divided into five parts, and one of them is the true width of the alse. The lintel beams (trabes liminares) are placed at a height which will make the breadths and heights equal. The muniment room (tablinum), if the width of the atrium be twenty feet, is to be two-thirds thereof. If from thirty to forty feet wide, one-half is assigned to the tablinum. From forty to sixty feet, the width is divided into five parts, and two given to the tablinum. The proportions of small atria cannot be the same as those of large ones; for if the proportions of the smaller be used in the greater, the tahlinum, as well as the alse, would be inconvenient: and if those of the larger be used in the smaller, their parts would be large and clumsy. I therefore thought it right to describe, with precision, their respective proportions, so that they might be both commodious and beautiful. The height of the tablinum to the beam is one-eighth part more than the breadth. The lacunaria are carried up one- third of the width higher. The passages (fauces) towards courts which are on a smaller scale, are to be one-third less than the width of the tablinum; but if larger, they are to be one-half. The statues, with their ornaments, are to be placed at a height equal to the width of the alse. The proportions of the height and width of doors, if Doric, are to be formed in that method: if Ionic, according to the Ionic mode, agreeably to the rules given for doors in the fourth book. The width of the uncovered part of the atrium (impluvii lumen) is not to be less than a fourth nor more than one-third of its width; its length, however, will be in proportion to that of the atrium. The cloister (peri-

138 stylium) is diagonally one-third part longer than wide. The columns are to be as high as the width of the portico ; and the intercolumniations of the peristylia are not to he less than three nor more than four diameters of the columns. But if the columns of a peristylium are of the Doric order, modules are taken, and the triglyphs arranged thereby, as described in the fourth book. CHAPTER V. OF TRICLINIA, CECI, EXEDRAE, PINACOTHECiE AND THEIR DIMENSIONS. The length of a triclinium is to he double its breadth. The height of all oblong rooms is thus regulated: add their length and breadth together, of which take one half, and it Avill give the dimension of the height. If, however, exedrae or oeci are square, their height is equal to once and a half their width. Pinacothecse (picture rooms), as well as exedrse, should be of large dimensions. The Corinthian tetrastyle and Egyptian ceci (halls) are to be proportioned similarly to the triclinia, as above described ; but inasmuch as columns are used in them, they are built of larger dimensions. There is this difference between the Corinthian and Egyptian oecus. The former has a single order of columns, standing either on a podium or on the ground, and over it architraves and cornices, either of wood or plaster, and a semicircular ceiling above the cornice. In the Egyptian oecus, over the lower columns is an architrave, from which to the surrounding wall is a boarded and paved floor, so as to form a passage round it in the open air. Then perpendicularly over the architrave of the lower columns, columns one-fourth

139 smaller are placed. Above tbeir architraves and cornices they are decorated with ceilings, and windows are placed between the upper columns. Thus they have the appearance of basilicse, rather than of Corinthian triclinia. CHAPTER VI. OF THE GRECIAN (ECI. (Eci are sometimes constructed differently from those of Italy; the Greeks call these KvtUrjvoi.  They face the north, with a prospect towards the gardens, and have doors in the middle. They are of such length and breadth that two tables (triclinia) with their accessories may stand in them opposite to each other. The windows, as well on the right as on the left, are to open like doors, so that the verdure may be seen through them whilst the guests recline on the couches. The height of them * is equal to once and a half the width. In these apartments, convenience must regulate the proportions. If the windows are not obscured by high walls adjoining, they may be easily contrived. But if any impediment occur, either through nearness of adjoining buildings or other obstruction, some ingenuity and skill will be requisite to diminish or increase their established proportions, so as to produce a pleasing effect not apparently different therefrom.

140 CHAPTEE VII. OF THE PROPER ASPECTS OF DIFFERENT SORTS OF BUILDINGS. I shall now describe how the different sorts of buildings are placed as regards their aspects. Winter triclinia and baths are to face the winter west, because the afternoon light is wanted in them; and not less so because the setting sun casts its rays upon them, and by its heat warms the aspect towards the evening hours. Bed chambers and libraries should be towards the east, for their purposes require the morning light: in libraries the books are in this aspect preserved from decay; those that are towards the south and west are injured by the worm and by the damp, which the moist winds generate and nourish, and spreading the damp, make the books mouldy. Spring and autumn triclinia should be towards the east, for then, if the windows be closed till the sun has passed the meridian, they are cool at the time they are wanted for use. Summer triclinia should be towards the north, because that aspect, unlike others, is not heated during the summer solstice, but, on account of being turned away from the course of the sun, is always cool, and affords health and refreshment. Pinacothecse should have the same aspect, as well as rooms for embroidering and painting, that the colours used therein, by the equability of the light, may preserve their brilliancy.

141 CHAPTEK VIII. OF THE FORMS OF HOUSES SUITED TO DIFFERENT RANKS OF PERSONS. The aspects proper for each part being appropriated, we must determine the situation of the private rooms for the master of the house, and those which are for general use, and for the guests. Into those which are private no one enters, except invited; such are bed chambers, triclinia, baths, and others of a similar nature. The common rooms, on the contrary, are those entered by any one, even unasked. Such are the vestibule, the cavsedium, the peristylia, and those which are for similar uses. Hence, for a person of middling condition in life, magnificent vestibules are not necessary, nor tahlina, nor atria, because persons of that description are those who seek favours which are granted by the higher ranks. Those, however, who have to lay up stores that are the produce of the country, should have stalls and shops in their vestibules: under their houses they should have vaults (cryptse), granaries (horrea), store rooms (apothecae), and other apartments, suited rather to preserve such produce, than to exhibit a magnificent appearance. The houses of hankers and receivers of the revenue may be more commodious and elegant, and well secured from the attacks of thieves. For advocates, and men of literature, houses ought to he still handsomer and more spacious, to suit the reception of persons on consultations. But for nobles, who in hearing honours, and discharging the duties of the magistracy, must have much intercourse with the citizens, princely vestibules must he provided, lofty atria, and spacious peristylia, groves, and extensive walks, finished in a magnificent style. In addition to these, libraries, pina- cothecse, and basilicse, of similar form to those which

142 are made for tlie public use, are to be provided; for in the houses of the noble, the affairs of the public, and the decision and judgment of private causes are often determined. If, therefore, houses are erected, thus adapted to the different classes of society, as directed in the first book under the head of propriety, there will be nothing to reprehend, for they will be suitable to their destination. These rules are no less applicable to country than to town dwellings, except that in town the atria must be close to the gates, whereas, in the country villa, the peristylium is near the entrance, then the atrium, with paved porticos round it looking towards the palaestra and walk. I have thus briefly described the proportions of town residences as I promised. I shall now proceed to those of houses in the country, so that they may afford the requisite accommodation. CHAPTER IX. OF THE PROPORTIONS OF HOUSES IN THE COUNTRY. First of all the salubrity of the situation must be examined, according to the rules given in the first book for the position of a city, and the site may be then determined. The size of a house should depend on the extent of the land attached to it, and its produce. The courts and their dimensions will be determined by the number of cattle, and the yokes of oxen employed. The kitchen is to be placed in the warmest part of the court; adjoining to this are placed the stalls for oxen, with the mangers at the same time towards the fire and towards the east, for oxen with their faces to the light and fire do not become rough-coated. Hence it is that husbandmen, who are altogether ignorant of the nature of aspects, think that oxen should look towards no other

143 region than that of the east. The width of the stalls should not be less than ten feet, nor more than fifteen ; lengthwise, each yoke is to he at least seven feet. The baths should be contiguous to the kitchen, for they will be then serviceable also for agricultural purposes. The press-room should also be near the kitchen, for the convenience of expressing the oil from the olive ; and near that the cellar, lighted from the north, for if it have any opening through which the heat of the sun can penetrate, the wine affected by the heat becomes vapid. The oil room is to be lighted from the southern and warmer parts of the heaven, that the oil may not be congealed, but be preserved liquid by means of a gentle heat. Its size must be proportioned to the quantity of fruit yielded on the estate, and the number of vessels, which, if of twenty amphorse (cullearia), are. about four feet diameter. The press, if worked by levers instead of screws, should occupy an apartment not less than forty feet long, so as to allow room for the revolution of the levers. Its width must not be less than sixteen feet, which will give ample room to turn and expedite the work. If two presses are employed, the width must be twenty-four feet. The sheep and goat houses are to be constructed so that not less than an area of four feet and a half, nor more than six feet, be allotted to each animal. The granaries are raised, and must be towards the north or east, so that the grain may not heat, but be preserved by the coolness of air; if towards other aspects, the weevil, and other insects injurious to corn, will be generated. The stable, especially in the villa, should be in the warmest place, and not with an aspect towards the fire, for if horses are stalled near a fire, their coats soon become rough. Hence those stalls are excellent which are away from the kitchen in the open space towards the east; for when the weather is clear in the winter season, the cattle brought thither in the morning to feed, may be then rubbed down. The barn,

144 hay-room, meal room, and mill, may he without the boundaries of the villa, which will be thereby rendered more secure from fire. If villas are required to be erected of more magnificence than ordinary, they must be formed according to the proportions laid down for town houses above described, but with the precautions necessary to prevent the purposes of a country house being interfered with. Care should be taken that all buildings are well lighted : in those of the country this point is easily accomplished, because the wall of a neighbour is not likely to interfere with the light. But in the city the height of party walls, or the narrowness of the situation may obscure the light. In this case we should proceed as follows. In that direction from which the light is to* be received, let a line be drawn from the top of the obstructing wall, to that part where the light is to be introduced, and if, looking upwards along that line, a large space of open sky be seen, the light may be obtained from that quarter without fear of obstruction thereof; but if there be any impediment from beams, lintels, or floors, upper lights must be opened, and the light thus introduced. In short, it may be taken as a general rule, that where the sky is seen, in such part apertures are to be left for windows, so that the building may be light. Necessary as light maybe in triclinia and other apartments, not less is it so in passages, ascents, and staircases, in which persons carrying loads frequently meet each other. I have explained to the best of my ability the arrangement used in our buildings, so that it may be clearly known by builders; and in order that the Greek arrangement may be also understood, I shall now briefly explain it.

145 CHAPTER X. OF THE ARRANGEMENT AND PARTS OF GRECIAN HOUSES. The Greeks using no atrium, and not building as we do, make a passage, of no great breadth, from the entrance gate, on one side whereof the stable is placed, and on the other the porter’s rooms, which immediately adjoin the inner gates. The space between the two gates, is, by the Greeks called Ovpwpeiov.  From this you enter into the peristylium, which has a portico on three sides. On that side facing the south are two antse, at a considerable distance apart, which carry beams, and the recess behind them is equal to one-third less than their distance from each other. This part is called n-pocnas ( prostas) by some, and by others wapao-ras (parastas). Interior to this the great eecus is placed, in which the mistress of the family sits with the spinsters. On the right and left of the prostas are the bed-chambers, of which one is called the thalamus, the other the antithalamus. Round the porticos are the triclinia for common use, the bed chambers, and other apartments for the family. This part of the building receives the name of Gynseconitis. Adjoining this is a larger house, with a more spacious peristylium, in which there are four porticos equal in height, though that towards the south may have higher columns. If a peristylium have one portico higher than the rest, it is called a Rhodian portico. These houses have magnificent vestibules, elegant gates, and the porticos of the peristylia are decorated with stucco and plastering, and with inlaid ceilings. In the porticos to the north the cyziceni, triclinia, and pinacothecse, are situated. The libraries are on the east side, the exedrse on the west, and to the south are square ceci, of such ample dimensions that there is room therein for four tricli- H

146 nia and the attendants on them, as well as for the games. These oeci are used only for entertainments given to men; for it is not the practice with women to recline on a couch at dinner. The peristylium, and this part of the house, is called Andronitis, because the men employ themselves therein without interruption from the women. On the right and left, moreover, are small sets of apartments, each having its own door, triclinium, and bed-chamber, so that on the arrival of guests they need not enter the peristylium, but are received in rooms (hospitalia) appropriated to their occupation. For when the Greeks were more refined, and possessed greater wealth, they provided a separate table with triclinia and bed-chambers for their guests. On the day of their arrival they were invited to dinner, and were afterwards supplied with poultry, eggs, herbs, fruits, and other produce of the country. Hence the painters gave the name of Xenia to those pictures which represent the presents made to guests. Masters of families therefore, living in these apartments, were quite, as it were, at home, being at liberty to do as they pleased therein. Between the peristylium and the lodging rooms are passages, which are called Mesaulse, from their situation between two aulse (halls). By us these are called Andrones. But it is remarkable that this appellation seems to suit neither the Greek nor Latin terms. For the Greeks call the ceci, in which male guests are entertained dvSpaVes, because the women do not enter them. There are other discrepancies similar to this, as the xystus, prothyrum, telamones, and others of that sort: gvo-ro 9, in Greek means a portico of large dimensions, in which athletse exercise in the winter season: we, on the contrary, call by the name of xysti those open walks which the Greeks call tt epiSpd/udes. The vestibule in front of a house, by the gates, is called prothyrum by the Greeks; we, however, give the name of prothyrum to that which the Greeks call SidOvpov (dia- thyrum). We call telamones those figures placed for the

147 support of mutuli or cornices, but on what account is not found in history. The Greeks, however, call them arXavTts ( atlantes). Atlas, according to history, is represented in the act of sustaining the universe, because he is said to have been the first person who explained to mankind the sun’s course, that of the moon, the rising and setting of the stars, and the celestial motions, by the power of his mind and the acuteness of his understanding. Hence it is, that, by painters and sculptors, he is, for his exertions, represented as bearing the world: and his daughters, the Atlantides, whom we call Vergilise, and the Greeks, IIAetaSes, were honoured by being placed among the constellations. I mention these things not to induce persons to change the names at this period, but that they may be known to philologists. I have explained the different arrangement of buildings after the practice of the Italians, as well as that of the Greeks, by giving the proportions and divisions of each; and, as we have already laid down the principles of beauty and propriety, we shall now consider the subject of strength, by which a building may be without defects, and durable. CHAPTEE XI. OF THE STRENGTH OF BUILDINGS. In those buildings which are raised from the level of the ground, if the foundations are laid according to the rules given in the preceding books for the construction of walls and theatres, they will be very durable ; but if underground apartments (hypogea) and vaults are to be built, their foundations must be thicker than the walls of the upper part of the edifice, which, as well as the pilasters and columns, must stand vertically over the middle of

148 the foundations below, so that they may be on the solid part. For if the weight of the walls or the columns have a false hearing, they cannot last long. It is, moreover, a good practice to place posts under the lintels, between the piers and pilasters; for when lintels and beams are loaded, they sag in the middle, and cause fractures in the work above: but when posts are introduced and wedged up under them, the beams are prevented from sagging and being injured. Care also should be taken to discharge the weight of walls by arches consisting of wedges concentrically arranged ; for if these are turned over beams or lintels, the beam, being relieved from the weight, will not sag; and when afterwards it is decayed through age, it may be easily replaced, without the necessity of shores. So in buildings, which are constructed on piers and arches, consisting of wedges whose joints are concentric, the outer piers should be wider than the others, that they may have more power to resist the action of the wedges, which, loaded with the weight of the superincumbent wall, press towards the centre, and have a tendency to thrust out the abutments. But if the outer piers be of large dimensions, by restraining the power of the wedges they will give stability to the work. Having paid due attention to these points, care must next be taken, and particularly is it to be observed, that the work be carried up perpendicularly and without inclination in any part. ?  The greatest attention must be bestowed on the lower parts of the walls, which are often damaged by the earth lying against them. This is not always of the same weight as in summer ;  for in the winter season, imbibing a great quantity of water from the rain, it increases in weight and bulk, and breaks and extrudes the walls. To remedy this evil, the thickness of the wall must he proportioned to the weight of earth against it, and, in front, counterforts (anterides) or buttresses (erismse) are carried up with the wall, at a distance from

149 each other equal to the height of the foundations, and of the same width as the foundations. Their projection at bottom is equal in thickness to the wall, and diminishing as they rise, their projection at top is equal to the thickness of the work: adjoining the inside of the wall, towards the mass of ground, teeth similar to those of a saw are constructed, each of which projects from the wall a distance equal to the height of the foundations, and their thickness is to be equal to that of the foundation wall. An extent equal to the height of the foundations is taken at the outer angles, and marked by points on each side; and through these a diagonal is drawn, on which a wall is carried up, and from the middle of this another is attached to the angle of the wall. The teeth and diagonal walls being thus constructed, will discharge the weight of earth from the wall, by distributing its pressure over a large surface. Thus I have described the precautions to be taken at the beginning of a building, to prevent defects. The same importance does not attach to the roof, with its beams and rafters, because if these at any time are found defective, they may be easily changed. I have also explained how those parts which are not built solid are to be strengthened. The quality of the materials it is not in the power of the architect to control: for the same species of materials are not found in every place ; and it depends on the employer whether the building shall be of brick, of rough stone, or of squared stone. The merit of every work is considered under three heads; the excellence of the workmanship, and the magnificence and design thereof. When a work is conducted as magnificently as possible, its cost is admired; when well built, the skill of the workman is praised; when beautifully, the merit belongs to the architect, on account of the proportion and symmetry which enter into the design. These will ever be apparent when he submits to listen to the opinions even of workmen, and ignorant persons. For other men, as

150 well as architects, can distinguish the good from the bad; hut between the ignorant man and the architect there is this difference, that the first can form no judgment till he sees the thing itself; whereas the architect, having a perfect idea in his mind, can perceive the beauty, convenience, and propriety of his design, before it is begun. I have laid down as clearly as I could the rules necessary for the construction of private buildings: in the following book I shall treat of the method of finishing them, so that they may be elegant and durable.

THE ARCHITECTURE OF MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO. BOOK THE SEVENTH. INTRODUCTION. The ancients by means of writing established the wise and useful practice of handing down to posterity their sentiments on different subjects, so that not only those might not be lost, but that hy their works continually increasing, a gradual advancement might be made to the highest point of learning. Our obligations to them therefore are great and many, from their not having sullenly kept their knowledge to themselves, but on the contrary, having recorded their opinions on every subject. Had they omitted to do this, we should not have known what happened in Troy, nor the sentiments of Thales, Democritus, Anaxagoras, Xenophanes, and other physiologists respecting the nature of things ; nor the system of ethics laid down by Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Zeno, Epicurus, and other philosophers. Of the actions of Croesus, Alexander, Darius, and other kings, and the principles on which they acted, we should have heen uninformed, unless the ancients had handed them down to posterity in their writings. As we are indebted to these,

152 so we are on the contrary hound to censure those, who, borrowing from others, publish as their own that of which they are not the authors; not less are they censurable, who, distorting the meaning of an author, glory in their perversion of it; indeed they deserve punishment for their dishonest conduct. It is said that this practice was strictly punished by the ancients ; I do not therefore think it foreign to the purpose to relate from history the result of some examples made by them. The Attalic kings, stimulated by their great love for philology, having established an excellent public library at Pergamus, Ptolemy, actuated by zeal and great desire for the furtherance of learning, collected with no less care, a similar one for the same purpose at Alexandria, about the same period. When by dint of great labour he had completed it, he was not satisfied, unless, like the seed of the earth, it was to go on increasing. He therefore instituted games to the Muses and Apollo, and in imitation of those in which wrestlers contended, he decreed rewards and honours to the victorious in literature. These being established, when the time of the games arrived, learned judges were to be selected for the decisions. The king having chosen six, and not readily finding a seventh, applied to those persons who had the care of the library, to ascertain whether they knew any one fit for the purpose. They told him that there was a certain man named Aristophanes, who with great labour and application was day after day reading through the books in the library. At the celebration of the games, Aristophanes was summoned and took his seat among those allotted for the judges. The first that contended were the poets, who recited their compositions, and the people unanimously signified to the judges the piece which they preferred. When the judges were required to decide, six of them agreed to award the first prize to him who had most pleased the multitude, and the second prize to some other candidate. The opinion of

153 m rewi Thekii ain ffl sppli • sinf lirei® priie to and the Aristophanes being required, be observed that the best poet had pleased the people the least. The king and the whole multitude expressed their great indignation at this opinion, hut he rose and besought that they would allow him to speak. Silence being obtained, he told them that one only of the competitors was a poet, that the others had recited other men’s compositions, and that the judges ought not to decide upon thefts but upon compositions. The people were astonished, and the king in doubt; but Aristophanes relying on his memory, quoted a vast number of books on certain shelves in the library, and comparing them with what had been recited, made the writers confess that they had stolen from them. The king then ordered them to be proceeded against for the theft, and after their condemnation dismissed them with ignominy. Aristophanes, however, was honoured with great rewards, and appointed librarian. Some time afterwards Zoilus of Macedonia, who assumed the cognomen of Homeromastix, came to Alexandria, and recited before the king his compositions in derogation of the Iliad and Odyssey. When Ptolemy perceived that the father of poetry and all philology, whose works are in esteem throughout all nations, was, because out of the reach of reply, abused by this man, he was enraged and did not deign to answer him. Zoilus, however, remaining some time longer in the country, oppressed with poverty, besought the king to bestow something on him. The king is said to have answered, that Homer, who had been dead more than a thousand years, had been the means during that period of affording a livelihood to thousands ; that he, therefore, who boasted that he possessed greater talent, ought to be able to support, not only himself, but many other persons. Having been condemned as a parricide, his death is variously related. Some have written that he was crucified by Philadelphus, some that he was stoned at Chios, others that he was burnt alive at h 3

154 Smyrna. Whichever of these circumstances occurred he richly deserved it, for that person does not seem to have merited a better fate, who reflects on those that are beyond the reach of hearing and explaining what is said of their writings. I, therefore, O Ceesar, do not publish this work, merely prefixing my name to a treatise which of right belongs to others, nor think of acquiring reputation by finding fault with the works of any one. On the contrary, I own myself under the highest obligations to all those authors, who by their great ingenuity have at various times on different subjects, furnished us with copious materials ; from which, as from a fountain, converting them to our own use, we are enabled to write more fully and expediently, and, trusting to whom we are prepared to strike out something new. Thus adhering to the principles which I found in those of their works adapted to my purpose, I have endeavoured to advance further. Agatharcus, at the time when iEscliylus taught at Athens the rules of tragic poetry, was the first who contrived scenery, upon which subject he left a treatise. This led Democritus and-Anaxagoras, who wrote thereon, to explain how the points of sight and distance ought to guide the lines, as in nature, to a centre; so that by means of pictorial deception, the real appearances of buildings appear on the scene, which, painted on a flat vertical surface, seem, nevertheless, to advance and recede. Silenus afterwards produced a treatise on the symmetry of Doric buildings ; Theodoras, on the Doric temple of Jupiter in Samos ; Ctesiphon and Metagenes, on that of the Ionic order in the temple of Diana at Ephesus. Phileos wrote a volume on the Ionic temple of Minerva at Priene, and Ictinus and Carpion on the Doric temple of Minerva at Athens, on the Acropolis; Theodoras Phoceus on the vaulted temple at Delphi; Philo on the symmetry of temples, and on the arsenal at the Pirseus ; Hermogenes on the Ionic pseudodipteral temple.at Magnesia, and the monopteral one of Father

Bacchus at Teos. Argelius wrote on the proportions of buildings of the Corinthian order, and on the Ionic temple of iEsculapius at Tralles, which he is said to have built. Satyrus and Phyteus, who were extremely fortunate, wrote on the Mausoleum, as did some also whose talents have been admired in all ages, and who have gained lasting reputation. Each front of it was assigned to a separate artist, to ornament and thereon try his skill. Those employed were Leochares, Bryaxes, Scopas, and Praxiteles; some say that Timo- theus was employed. The great art displayed by these men, caused this work to be ranked among the seven wonders. Besides these, many of less celebrity have written precepts on proportions, as Nexaris, Theocydes, Demophilos, Pollis, Leonides, Silanion, Melampus, Sar- nacus, and Euphranor. Many on mechanics, as Cliades, Archytas, Archimedes, Otesibius, Nymphodorus, Philo Byzantius, Diphilus, Democles, Charidas, Polyidus, Phyros, Agesistratus. From the commentaries of these, what I thought useful I have thrown together, and that the more especially because I observe that on this branch the Greeks have published much, and our own countrymen very little. Fussitius, however, and he was the first, produced an excellent work on the subject. Terentius Varro, in his work on the nine sciences, includes one on architecture. Publius Septimius wrote two. Besides these, I do not recollect any one that up to this time has written, though we have formerly produced great architects, and such as were well qualified to have written with elegance. In fact the foundations of the temple of Jupiter Olympius at Athens were prepared by Antistates, Callseschrus, Antimachides and Porinus, architects employed by Pisistratus, after whose death, on account of the troubles which affected the republic, the work was abandoned. About two hundred years afterwards, king Antiochus, having agreed to supply the money for the work, a Roman citizen, named

156 Cossutius, designed with great skill and taste the cell, the dipteral arrangement of the columns, the cornices,, and other ornaments. This work is not only universally esteemed, but is accounted one of the rarest specimens of magnificence. For in four places only are the temples embellished with work in marble, and from that circumstance the places are very celebrated, and their excellence and admirable contrivance is pleasing to the gods themselves. The first is the temple of Diana at Ephesus, of the Ionic order, built by Ctesiphon of Gnosus, and his son Metagenes, afterwards completed by Demetrius, a priest of Diana, and Pseonius, the Ephesian. The second is the temple of Apollo, at Miletus, also of the Ionic order, built by the above- named Pseonius, and Daphnis, the Milesian. The third is the Doric temple of Geres and Proserpine, at Eleusis, the cell of which was built by Ictinus, of extraordinary dimensions, for the greater convenience of the sacrifices, and without an exterior colonnade. This structure, when Demetrius Phalereus governed Athens, was turned by Philus into a prostyle temple, with columns in front, and by thus enlarging the vestibule, he not only provided accommodation for the noviciates, but gave great dignity to its appearance. Lastly, in Athens it is said that Cossutius was the architect of the temple of Jupiter Olympius, which was of large dimensions, and of the Corinthian order and proportions, as above mentioned. From the pen of this man no treatise is extant; nor is it from him alone that such would have been less desirable, than from Caius Mutius, who with great science, and according to the just rules of art, completed the cell, columns, and entablature of the temples of Honour and Virtue, near the trophy of Marius, a work, which, had it been of marble, and thereby endowed with the splendour and richness which the material must have added, would have been reckoned among the first and most excellent examples. It therefore appears

157 that our country can boast of as great architects as Greece herself, many of them even within our own times, hut since few have left behind them any treatises, I thought it improper to omit any thing, and to treat of the different branches in different books. In the sixth book I have given rules for building private houses ; in this, the seventh, I shall describe their finishing, and how that is to be rendered both beautiful and durable. CHAPTER I. OF PAVEMENTS. I shall begin with pavements, which are the principal of the finishings, and should be executed with the greatest care and attention to their solidity. If the pavement be made on the ground itself, the soil must be examined, to ascertain that it is solid throughout, then over it is to be spread and levelled a layer of rubbish. But if the whole or any part of the earth be loose, it is to be made solid with a rammer. In timber floors care must be taken that no wall be built under them, so as to touch the under side of the floors; but that a space be rather left between them and the floors. For if they be made solid, the timber of the floors drying and settling, whilst the wall remains in its place, will cause fissures in the pavement to the right and left. Care must also be taken that holm timber be not used with oak; for as soon as oak becomes damp, it warps, and causes cracks in the pavement. If, however, holm is not to be had, and on that account it be absolutely necessary to use oak, it should be cut very thin, by which means its power will be diminished, and it will be more easily fastened with the nails. Then through the edges of the boards

158 two nails are to be driven into every joist, so that no part of the edges may warp. I do not mention the chestnut, beech, or the farnus, because neither of them is durable. The floor being prepared, fern, if at hand, and if not, straw, is to be spread over it, so that the timber may not be injured by the lime. On this is placed a layer of stones, each of which is not to be less than will fill a man’s hand. These being spread, the pavement is laid thereon. If the rubbish be new, let three parts of it be mixed with one of lime ; but if from old materials, the proportion is five parts to two of lime. It is then laid on, and brought to a solid consistence with wooden beaters and the repeated blows of a number of men, till its thickness is about three quarters of a foot. Over this is spread the upper layer, composed of three parts of potsherds to one of lime, of a thickness not less than six inches. Over the upper layer the pavement is laid to rule and level, whether composed of slabs or of tesserae. When laid with their proper inclination, they are to be rubbed off, so that, if in slabs, there may be no rising edges of the ovals, triangles, squares, or hexagons, but that the union of the different joints may be perfectly smooth. If the pavement be composed of tesserae, the edges of them should be completely smoothed off, or the work cannot be said to be well finished. So, also, the Tiburtine tiles, peaked at the points, should be laid with care, that there may be neither hollows on them, nor ridges, but that they be flat, and rubbed to a regular surface. After the rubbing and polishing, marble dust is strewed over it, and over that a coat of lime and sand. Pavements are, however, more fit to be used in the open air, inasmuch as timbers expanding in a moist atmosphere, and contracting in a dry one, or sagging in the middle, cause defects in the pavement by their settlements. Moreover, frosts and ice soon ruin them. But as they are sometimes required, they must be made as follows. Over the first flooring boards, others crossing

159 them, must be laid, fastened with nails ; thus giving a double covering to the beams. The pavement is composed of two parts of fresh rubbish, one of potsherds, and two of lime. After the first layer of rubbish on the floor, this composition is spread over it, and pounded into a mass not less than a foot thick. The upper layer being then spread, as above directed, the pavement, consisting of tesserae, each about two inches thick, is laid, with an inclination of two inches to ten feet: if thus executed, and afterwards properly rubbed, it will not be liable to defects. In order that the mortar at the joints may not suffer by the frost, at the approach of winter every year it should be saturated with the dregs of oil, which will prevent the frost affecting it. If extraordinary care be required, the pavement is covered with tiles two feet square, properly jointed, having small channels, of the size of an inch, cut on each edge. These are filled with lime tempered with oil, the edges being rubbed and pressed together. Thus the lime in the channels growing hard, suffers neither water nor anything else to penetrate. After this preparation the upper layer is spread and beaten with sticks. Over this either large tesserae or angle tiles are laid at the inclination above directed, and work so executed will not be easily injured. CHAPTEK II. OF TEMPERING LIME FOR STUCCO. Having given the necessary directions in respect of pavement, we shall explain the method of stuccoing. This requires that the lime should be of the best quality, and tempered a long time before it is wanted for use ; so that if any of it be not burnt enough, the length of time employed in slaking it may bring the whole mass to the

160 same consistence. If the lime be not thoroughly slaked, but used fresh, it will when spread throw out blisters, from the crude particles it contains, which, in execution, break and destroy the smoothness of the stucco. When the slaking is properly conducted, and care taken in the preparation of the materials, a hatchet is used, similar to that with which timber is hewn, and the lime is to be chopped with it, as it lies in the heap. If the hatchet strikes upon lumps, the lime is not sufficiently slaked, and when the iron of the instrument is drawn out dry and clean, it shews that the lime is poor and weak; but if, when extracted, the iron exhibits a glutinous substance adhering to it, that not only indicates the richness and thorough slaking of the lime, but also shews that it has been well tempered. The scaffolding being then prepared, the compartments of the rooms are executed, except the ceilings be straight. CHAPTEB III. OF STUCCO WOEK. When arched ceilings are introduced, they must be executed as follows. Parallel ribs are set up, not more than two feet apart: those of cypress are preferable, because fir is soon injured by the rot and age. These ribs being got out to the shape of the curve, they are fixed to the ties of the flooring or roof, as the case may require, with iron nails. The ties should be of wood not liable to injury from rot, nor age nor damp, such as box, juniper, olive, heart of oak, cypress, and the like, common oak always excepted, which, from its liability to warp, causes cracks in the work whereon it is employed. The ribs having been fixed, Greek reeds, previously bruised, are tied to them, in the required form, with cords made

161 of the Spanish broom. On the upper side of the arch a composition of lime and sand is to he laid, so that if any water fall from the floor above or from the roof, it may not penetrate. If there he no supply of Greek reeds, the common slender marsh-reeds may be substituted, tied together with string in bundles of appropriate length, but of equal thickness, taking care that the distance from one ligature to another be not more than two feet. These are bound with cord to the ribs, as above directed, and made fast with wooden pins. All the remaining work is to be performed as above described. The arches being prepared and interwoven with the reeds, a coat is to be laid on the underside. The sand is afterwards introduced on it, and it is then polished with chalk or marble. After polishing, the cornices are to be run along the springing: they are to be as slender and light as possible; for, when large, they settle by their own weight’ and are incapable of sustaining themselves. But little plaster should be used in them, and the stuff should be of uniform quality, such as marble-dust; for the former, by setting quickly, does not allow the work to dry of one consistence. The practice of the ancients, in arched ceilings, is also to be avoided; for their cornices are dangerous, from their great projection and consequent weight. Some cornices are of plain, others of carved, work. In small private rooms, or where fire or many lights are used, they should be plain, to allow of being more easily cleaned; in summer rooms, and exedrse, where the smoke is in such small quantity that it can do no injury, carved cornices may be used; for white works, from the delicacy of their colour, are always soiled, not only with the smoke of the house itself, but also with that of the neighbouring buildings. The cornices being completed, the first coat of the walls is to be laid on as roughly as possible, and, while drying, the sand coat thereon; setting it out, in the direction of the length, by the rule and square ; in that of the height,

162 perpendicularly; and in respect of the angles perfectly square; inasmuch as plastering, thus finished, will be proper for the reception of paintings. When the work has dried, a second and afterwards a third coat is laid on. The sounder the sand coat is, the more durable will the work be. When, besides the first coat, three sand coats at least have been laid, the coat of marble-dust follows ; and this is to be so prepared, that when used, it does not stick to the trowel, hut easily comes away from the iron. Whilst the stucco is drying, another thin coat is to be laid on : this is to be well worked and rubbed, and then still another, finer than the last. Thus, with three sand coats and the same number of marble-dust coats, the walls will be rendered solid, and not liable to cracks or other defects. When the stuff is well beaten, and the under coats made solid, and afterwards well smoothed by the hardness and whiteness of the marble-powder, it throws out the colours mixed therein with great brilliancy. Colours, when used with care on damp stucco, do not fade, but are very durable ; because the lime being deprived of its moisture in the kiln, and having become porous and dry, readily imbibes whatever is placed on it. From their different natures the various particles unite in the mixture, and, wherever applied, grow solid; and when dry, the whole seems composed of one body of the same quality. Stucco, therefore, when well executed, does not either become dirty, or lose its colour when washed, unless it has been carelessly done, or the colour laid on after the work was dry: if however executed as above directed, it will be strong, brilliant, and of great durability. When only one coat of sand and one of marble-dust are used, it is easily broken, from its thinness ; and is not, on that account, capable of acquiring a brilliant appearance. As a silver mirror, made from a thin plate, reflects the image confusedly and weakly, whilst from a thick solid plate it takes a high polish, and reflects the image brilliantly and strongly ; so plastering,

■when thin in substance, not only cracks, but soon decays. On the contrary, that which is well covered with plaster and stucco, and closely laid on, when well polished, not only shines, but reflects to the spectators the images falling on it. The plasterers of the Greeks thus not only make their work hard, by adhering to the above directions, but, when the plaster is mixed, cause it to be beaten with wooden staves by a great number of men, and use it after this preparation. Hence, some persons, cutting slabs of plaster from the ancient walls, use them for tables ; and the pieces of plaster so cut out for tables and mirrors, are, of themselves, very beautiful in appearance. If stucco be used on timber partitions, which are necessarily constructed with spaces between the upright and cross pieces, and thence, when smeared with clay, liable to swell with the damp, and when dry to shrink, and cause cracks, the following expedient should be used. After the partition has been covered with the clay, reeds, by the side of each other, are to be nailed thereon with bossed nails ; and clay having been laid over these, and another layer of tweeds nailed on the former, but crossed in their direction, so that one set is nailed upright, and the other horizontally; then, as above described, the sand and marble coats and finishing are to be followed up. The double row of reeds thus crossed on walls prevents all cracks and fissures. CHAPTER IV. OF STUCCO WORK IN DAMP PLACES. I have explained how plastering is executed in dry situations ; now I shall give directions for it, that it may be durable in those that are damp. First, in apartments on the ground-floor; a height of three feet from the pave-

164 ment is to have its first coat of potsherds, instead of sand,, so that this part of the plastering may not he injured by the damp. But if a wall is liable to continual moisture, another thin wall should be carried up inside it, as far within as the case will admit; and between the two walls a cavity is to he left lower than the level of the floor of the apartment, with openings for air. At the upper part, also, openings must be left; for if the damp do not evaporate through these holes above and below, it will extend to the new work. The wall is then to be plastered with the potsherd mortar, made smooth, and then polished with the last coat. If, however, there be not space for another wall, channels should nevertheless he made, and holes therefrom to the open air. Then tiles of the size of two feet are placed on one side, over the side of the channel, and, on the other side, piers are built, of eight inch bricks, on which the angles of two tiles may lie, that they may not be more distant than one palm from each other. Over them other tiles, with returning edges, are fixed upright, from the bottom to the top of the wall; and the inner surfaces of these are to be carefully pitched over, that they may resist the moisture ; they are, moreover, to have airholes at bottom, and at top above the vault. They are then to be whited over with lime and water, that the first coat may adhere to them; for, from the dryness they acquire in burning, they would neither take that coat nor sustain it, but for the lime thus interposed, which joins and unites them. The first coat being laid on, the coat of pounded potsherds is spread, and the remainder is finished according to the rules above given. The ornaments for polished stuccos ought to be used with a regard to propriety, suitable to the nature of the place, and should be varied in their composition. In winter triclinia, neither large pictures nor delicate ornaments in the cornice, under the vault, are to be introduced, because they are injured by the smoke of the fire, and

165 of the quantity of lights used therein. In these, above the podium, polished pannels of a black colour are introduced, with yellow or red margins round them. The method of finishing plain as well as enriched ceilings having been described, it will not be amiss, in case any one should wish to know it, to explain the construction of the pavements used in the Grecian winter rooms ; which is not only economical but useful. The floor of the triclinium is excavated to the depth of about two feet; and after the bottom is well rammed, a pavement of rubbish or potsherds is spread over it, with a declivity towards the holes of the drain. A composition of pounded charcoal, lime, sand, and ashes, is mixed up and spread thereover, half a foot in thickness, perfectly smooth and level. The surface being then rubbed with stone, it has the appearance of a black pavement. Thus, at their banquets, the liquor that is spilt, and the expectoration which falls on it, immediately dry up ; and the persons who wait on the guests, though barefooted, do not suffer from cold on this sort of pavement. CHAPTEE V. OF THE USE OF PAINTING IN BUILDINGS. In the other rooms, namely, those for vernal, autumnal, and summer use ; in atria also, and peristylia, certain kinds of pictures were used by the ancients. Painting represents subjects which exist or may exist, such as men, houses, ships, and other things, the forms and precise figures of which are transferred to their representations. Hence those of the ancients who first used polished coats of plastering, originally imitated the variety and arrangement of inlaid marbles. Afterwards

166 the variety was extended to the cornices, and the yellow and red frames of pannels, from which they proceeded to the representations of buildings, columns, and the projections of roofs. In spacious apartments, such as exedrse, on account of their extent, they decorated the walls with scenery, after the tragic, comic or satyric mode ; and galleries from their extended length, they decorated with varied landscapes, the representations of particular spots. In these they also painted ports, promontories, the coasts of the sea, rivers, fountains, straits, groves, mountains, cattle, shepherds, and sometimes figures representing gods, and stories, such as the Trojan battles, or the wanderings of Ulysses over different countries, and other subjects, founded on real history. But those which were used by the ancients are now tastelessly laid aside: inasmuch as monsters are painted in the present day rather than objects whose prototype are to be observed in nature. For columns reeds are substituted; for pediments the stalks, leaves, and tendrils of plants ; candelabra are made to support the representations of small buildings, from whose summits many stalks appear to spring with absurd figures thereon. Not less so are those stalks with figures rising from them, some with human heads, and others with the heads of beasts; because similar forms never did, do, nor can exist in nature. These new fashions have so much prevailed, that for want of competent judges, true art is little esteemed. How is it possible for a reed to support a roof, or a candelabrum to bear a house with the ornaments on its roof, or a small and pliant stork to carry a sitting figure; or, that half figures and flowers at the same time should spring out of roots and stalks ? And yet the public, so far from discouraging these falsehoods, are delighted with them, not for a moment considering whether such things could exist. Hence the minds of the multitude, misled by improper judges, do not discern that which is founded

167 on reason and the rules of propriety. No pictures should he tolerated hut those established on the basis of truth; and although admirably painted, they should be immediately discarded, if they transgress the rules of propriety and perspicuity as respects the subject. At Tralles, a town of Lydia, when Apaturius of Alabanda had painted an elegant scene for the little theatre which they call eKKXrjcriaoT'qpiov,  in which, instead of columns, he introduced statues and centaurs to support the episty- lium, the circular end of the dome, and angles of the pediments, and ornamented the cornice with lions’ heads, all of which are appropriate as ornaments of the rooting and eaves of edifices ; he painted above them, in the episcenium, a repetition of the domes, porticos, half pediments, and other parts of roofs and their ornaments. Upon the exhibition of this scene, which on account of its richness gave great satisfaction, every one was ready to applaud, when Licinius, the mathematician, advanced, and thus addressed them: “ The Alabandines are sufficiently informed in civil matters, but are without judgment on subjects of less moment; for the statues in their Gymnasium are all in the attitude of pleading causes, whilst those in the forum are holding the discus, or in the attitude of running, or playing with balls, so that the impropriety of the attitudes of the figures in such places disgraces the city. Let us therefore, be careful by our treatment of the scene of Apaturius, not to deserve the appellation of Alabandines or Abderites ; for who among you would place columns or pediments on the tiles which cover the roofs of your houses ? These things stand on the floors, not on the tiles. If, then, approbation is conferred on representations in painting which cannot exist in fact, we of this city shall be like those who for a similar error are accounted illiterate.” Apaturius dared not reply, but took down and altered the scene, so as to make it consistent with truth, and then it was approved. O that

168 the gods would restore Licinius to life, that he might correct the folly, and fashionable inconsistency in our stucco work. It is not foreign to my purpose to show how inconsistency overcomes truth. The ancients laboured to accomplish and render pleasing by dint of art, that which in the present day is obtained by means of strong and gaudy colouring, and for the effect which was formerly obtained only by the skill of the artist, a prodigal expense is now substituted. Who in former times used minium otherwise than as a medicine ? In the present age, however, walls are everywhere covered with it. To this may be added the use of chrysocolla, purple, and azure decorations, which, without the aid of real art, produce a splendid effect. These are so costly, that unless otherwise stated in agreements, they are to be, by law, charged to the account of the employer. To my utmost I have described the means for avoiding defective plastering, and as lime has previously been sufficiently treated of, it now remains to treat of marble. CHAPTER VI. OF THE PREPARATION OF MARBLE FOR PLASTERING. Marble is not alike in all countries. In some places it contains pellucid particles, similar to those of salt, which, when bruised and ground, impart great solidity to plastering and cornices. When these are not to be obtained, the chips (assulse), as they are denominated, which the workers in marble throw off' in working, may be substituted after being pounded and sifte'd. They are to he separated into three sorts, of which that which contains the larger particles, is, as we have above directed, to be laid on with the sand and lime : then follows the second

169 coat, and afterwards, the third which is finer in texture. After this preparation, and a careful polishing of the work, the colours which it is to receive are to he considered, so that thfey may he brilliant. Their variety and the method of preparing them will be found in the following pages. CHAPTER VII. OF NATURAL COLOURS. Some are found in certain places in a native state, and thence dug up, whilst others are composed of different substances, ground and mixed together, so as to answer the same purpose. First we shall explain the nature of that which is found native, called by the Greeks wxpa. This, as in Italy, is discovered in many places, but the best is the Attic sort, which cannot now be procured, for in working the silver mines at Athens, if by chance they fell upon a vein of ochre, they followed it up just as they would one of silver. Hence the ancients used abundance of ochre in their finishings. Red ochre is also found in many places, but the best only in a few, as at Sinope, in Pontus; in Egypt; in the Balearic Islands, near the coast of Spain; also in Lemnos, the revenue of which island the senate and people of Rome granted to the Athenians. The Parsetonion takes its name from the place where it is dug up. The Melinon on a similar account is so called, from its abundance in Melos, one of the Cyclades. Green chalk is also found in many places ; but the best comes from Smyrna, and is called by the Greeks OeoSonov,  because Theodotus was the owner of the land in which it was first discovered. Or- piment, which is called dpcreWov in Greek, is obtained from Pontus, Red lead is also obtained from many I

170 places, but the best comes from Pontus, near the river Hypanis. In other spots as in the country between the borders of Magnesia and Ephesus, it is procured from the earth in such a state as to want neither grinding nor sifting, but quite as fine as that which is ground and pounded by hand. CHAPTEE VIII. OF VERMILION AND QUICKSILVER. I shall now speak of vermilion. This is said to have been first found in the Cilbian fields of the Ephesians, and the manner of procuring and preparing it is very curious. A clod of earth is selected, which, before it is manufactured into vermilion, is called Anthrax, wherein are veins resembling iron, but of a red colour, and having a red dust round them. When dug up, it is beaten with iron bars till a great number of drops of quicksilver exude from it; these are immediately collected by the excavators. The clods, when collected in the laboratory, on account of their great dampness, are thrown into a furnace to dry; and the f um es that rise from them through the action of the fire fall condensed on the floor of the furnace, and are found to be quicksilver. But as, from the smallness of the drops which thus remain, they cannot be gathered up, they are swept into a vessel of water, in which they run together and reunite. These, when they fill a vessel of the capacity of four sextarii, weigh one hundred pounds. If quicksilver be placed in a vessel, and a stone of a hundred pounds weight be placed on it, it will swim at the top, and will, notwithstanding its weight, be incapable of pressing the liquid so as to break or separate it. If this be taken out, and only a single scruple of gold be put in, that will not swim,

171 but immediately descend to the bottom. This is a proof that the gravity of a body does not depend on its weight, but on its nature. Quicksilver is used for many purposes ; without it, neither silver nor brass can be properly gilt. When gold is embroidered on a garment which is worn out and no longer fit for use, the cloth is burnt over the fire in earthen pots; the ashes are thrown into water, and quicksilver added to them: this collects all the particles of gold, and unites with them. The water is then poured off, and the residuum placed in a cloth: which, when squeezed with the hands, suffers the liquid quicksilver to pass through the pores of the cloth, but retains the gold in a mass within it. CHAPTER IX. OF THE PREPARATION OF VERMILION. I now return to the preparation of vermilion. When the clods are dry, they are pounded and reduced to powder with iron beaters, and then, by means of repeated washings and dryings, the colour is produced. When this is effected, the vermilion, deprived of the quicksilver, loses its natural tenacity, and becomes soft and disconnected ; and used in the last coat of the plastering of rooms, keeps its colour without fading. But in open places, such as peristylia or exedrse, and similar situations whereto the rays of the sun and moon penetrate, the brilliancy of the colour is destroyed by contact with them, and it becomes black. Thus, as it has happened to many others, Faberius, the scribe, wishing to have his house on the Aventine elegantly finished, coloured the walls of the peristylia with vermilion. In the course of thirty days they turned to a disagreeable uneven colour;

172 on which account he was obliged to agree with the contractors to lay on other colours. Those who are particular in this respect, and are desirous that the vermilion should retain its colour, should, when the wall is coloured and dry, rub it with a hard brush charged with Punic wax melted and tempered with oil: then, with live coals in an iron pan, the wall should be thoroughly heated, so as to melt the wax and make it lie even, and then rubbed with a candle and clean cloth, as they do marble statues. This practice is called fcawis by the Greeks. The coat of Punic wax prevents the effect of the moon’s as well as that of the sun’s rays thereon which injure and destroy the colours in work of this nature. The laboratories which were formerly carried on at the mines in Ephesus are now transferred to 1 Eome, on account of mines of the same sort having been discovered in some parts of Spain, whence the clods are brought and worked by manufacturers at Eome. These laboratories are situated between the temples of Flora and Quirinus. Vermilion is occasionally adulterated with lime. The following is a method by which its goodness may be proved. Let the vermilion be placed on an iron plate over the fire, and remain till the plate is red hot: when the heat has changed the colour, and it appears black, let the plate be removed from the fire. If, when cooled, it returns to its original j colour, it may be considered pure. But if it remain of | a black colour, it is quite clear that it has been adul- | terated. I have written all that I remember respecting | vermilion. Chrysocolla comes from Macedonia, and is F found in the vicinity of copper mines. Minium and J indigo, by their names, indicate the places from whence they are obtained. I

173 CHAPTEB X. OF ARTIFICIAL COLOURS. OF BLACK. I have now to speak of those bodies which, from particular treatment, change their qualities, and acquire the properties of colour; and first, of black, which is much employed in different works, in order that it may he known how it is prepared for use. An apartment is built similar to a laconicum, plastered with marble stucco, and polished. In front of it is built a furnace, which communicates with the laconicum ; the mouth of this is to be very carefully closed, for the purpose of preventing the escape of the flame. Eesin is then placed in the furnace, whose smoke, when the material is set on fire, passes by means of communications into the laconicum, and therein adheres to the walls and the arched ceiling. It is then collected, and some part of it is tempered with gum, to make ink for transcribers; the remainder is used by stuccoers in colouring walls, being previously mixed with size. But if this cannot be procured, in order to prevent delay, the following expedient may be adopted. Pine branches or chips must be burnt, and, when thoroughly charred, pounded in a mortar with size. Thus the plasterer will procure an agreeable black colour. A black colour, not less pleasing, is made by drying and burning lees of wine in a furnace, and grinding the result with size. Indeed, this makes a very agreeable black. The better the wine whose lees are used, the better will be the black colour ; which will, in such case, approach the colour of indigo.

174 CHAPTER XI. OF BLUE, AND OF BUBNT YELLOW. Blue was first manufactured at Alexandria, and afterwards by Yestorius at Puzzuoli. The method of making it, and the nature of the ingredients, merit our attention. Sand is ground with flowers of sulphur, till the mixture is as fine as flour, to which coarse filings of Cyprian copper are added, so as to make a paste when moistened with water; this is rolled into balls with the hand, and dried. The balls are then put into an earthen vessel, and that is placed in a furnace. Thus the copper and sand heating together by the intensity of the fire, impart to each other their different qualities, and thereby acquire their blue colour. Burnt yellow, which is much used in stuccos, is thus made. A lump of good yellow earth is heated red hot; it is then quenched in vinegar, by which it acquires a purple colour. CHAPTER XII. OF WHITE LEAD, VERDIGREASE, AND RED LEAD. It will be proper to explain in what manner white lead is made, and also verdigrease, which we call seruca. The Rhodians place, in the bottoms of large vessels, a layer of twigs, over which they pour vinegar, and on the twigs they lay masses of lead. The vessels are covered, to prevent evaporation ; and when, after a certain time, they are opened, the masses are found changed into white lead. In the same way they make verdigrease, which is called seruca, by means of plates of

175 copper. The white lead is roasted in a furnace, and, by the action of the fire, becomes red lead. This invention was the result of observation in the case of an accidental fire; and, by the process, a much better material is obtained than that which is procured from mines. CHAPTER XIII. OF PURPLE. I shall now speak of purple, which, above all other colours, has a delightful effect, not less from its rarity than from its excellence. It is procured from the marine shell which yields the scarlet dye, and possesses qualities not less extraordinary than those of any other body whatever. It does not in all places where it is found possess the same quality of colour ;  hut varies in that respect according to the sun’s course. Thus, that which is obtained in Pontus and in Galatia, from the nearness of those countries to the north, is brown; in those between the south and the west, it is pale; that which is found in the equinoctial regions, east and west, is of a violet hue; lastly, that which comes from southern countries possesses a red quality: the red sort is also found in the island of Rhodes, and other places near the equator. After the shells are gathered they are broken into small pieces with iron bars; from the blows of which, the purple dye oozes out like tears, and is drained into mortars and ground. It is called ostrum, because extracted from marine shells. Inasmuch as this colour, from its saltness, soon dries, it is prepared for use with honey.

176  * CHAPTER XIY. OF FACTITIOUS COLOURS. Purple colours are also made by tinging chalk with madder-root and hysginum. Divers colours are also made from flowers. Thus, when dyers are desirous of imitating the Attic ochre, they put dry violets into a vessel, and boil them. When so prepared, they pour the contents of the vessel on to a cloth, and, squeezing it with their hands, receive in a mortar the water thus coloured by the violet, and then, mixing Eretrian earth with it, and grinding it, the colour of Attic ochre is produced. In the same way an excellent purple is obtained by preparing vaccinium, and mixing it with milk. So also, those who cannot afford the use of chrysocolla, mix blue with the herb w T eld, and thus obtain a brilliant green. These are called factitious colours. On account of the dearness of indigo, Selinu- sian chalk, or that used for making rings, is mixed with glass, which the Greeks call vaXos;  and thus they imitate indigo. In this book I have explained, as they have occurred to me, the methods of making colours for painting, so that they may be durable and appropriate. Thus, in seven books, are methodically laid down all the rules that relate to the perfection and convenience of buildings. In the following book I shall treat of water, how it is to be found and conveyed to any place; as also how to ascertain its salubrity, and fitness for the purposes to which it is to be applied.

'^v#

WMssmk^ '*7 i " « jV, n- v ;; '.-• ' £4i--AtW §»y?; ,% London.:Lockwood Sc C°, 7 -StationersHall Court,Ludgate Hill.

THE ARCHITECTURE OF MARCUS YITRUVIUS POLLIO. BOOK THE EIGHTH. INTRODUCTION. Thales, the Milesian, one of the seven wise men, taught that water was the original cause of all things. Heraclitus maintained the same of fire : the priests of the magi, of water and fire. Euripides, a disciple of Anaxagoras, called by the Athenians the dramatic philosopher, attributed it to air and earth; and contended that the latter, impregnated by the seed contained in the rain falling from the heavens, had generated mankind and all the animals on the earth; and that all these, when destroyed by time, returned to their origin. Thus, such as spring from the air, also return into air, and not being capable of decay, are only changed by their dissolution, returning to that element whereof they first consisted. But Pythagoras, Empedocles, Epicharmus, and other physiologists, and philosophers, maintained that there were four elements, air, fire, water, and earth; and that their mixture, according to the difference of the species, forms a natural mould of different qualities. We must recollect, that not only from these elements i 3

178 are all things generated, but that they can neither be nourished, nor grow without their assistance. Thus bodies cannot live without abundance of air; that is, without its being furnished for inspiration and respiration in considerable quantity. So, also, if a body do not possess a due proportion of heat, it can neither be endued with animal spirits nor a strong constitution, nor will the hardness of its food be duly attenuated: and if the members of the body are not nourished by the fruits of the earth, they will waste, because deprived of the mixture of that element with them. Lastly, animals deprived of moisture, from want of water dry up, and are bloodless and parched. Divine Providence has made those things neither scarce nor dear which are necessary for mankind, as are pearls, gold, silver, and the like, which are neither necessary for the body nor nature ; but has diffused abundantly, throughout the world, those things, without which the life of mortals would be uncertain.. Thus, if a body be deficient in spirit, the deficiency is supplied by the air. The power of the sun, and the discovery of fire, are always ready to assist us, and render life more certain. The fruits of the earth also, furnishing nourishment even to excess, feed and support animals continually. Water is of infinite utility to us, not only as affording drink, but for a great number of purposes in life; and it is furnished to us gratuitously. Hence the priests of the Egyptian worship teach, that all things are composed of water; and when they cover the vase of water, which is borne to the temple with the most solemn reverence, kneeling on the earth, with their hands raised to heaven, they return thanks to divine goodness for its creation.

179 CHAPTER I. OP THE METHOD OF FINDING WATER As it is the opinion of physiologists, philosophers and priests that all things proceed from water, I thought it necessary, as in the preceding seven hooks rules are laid down for buildings, to describe in this the method of finding water, its different properties, according to the varied nature of places, how it ought to he conducted, and in what manner it should he judged of; inasmuch as it is of infinite importance, for the purposes of life, for pleasure, and for our daily use. This will he easily accomplished if the springs are open and flowing above ground. If that he not the case, their sources under ground are to he traced and examined. In order to discover these, before sunrise one must lie down prostrate in the spot where he seeks to find it, and with his chin placed on the ground and fixed, look around the place ; for the chin being fixed, the eye cannot range upwards farther than it ought, and is confined to the level of the place. Then, where the vapours are seen curling together and rising into the air, there dig, because these appearances are not discovered in dry places. We should also consider the nature of the place when we search for water. In clay, the vein of water is small, the supply little, and not of the best flavour; and if in low places, it will be muddy and ill tasted. In black earth, only triekiings and small drops are found, which, collected from tne winter rain, subside in compact hard places, and are of very excellent flavour. In gravel, the veins are small and variable, but they are exceeding well flavoured. In the strong, common and red sands, the supply is to be depended on with more certainty, and is of good taste. In red stone, abundance and that of good quality may be obtained, if it do not filter away and escape through the pores. At the feet of

180 mountains, and about flinty rocks the supply is copious and abundant; it is there cold and more wholesome. In champaign countries, the springs are salt, gross, tepid, and unpleasant, except those, which percolating from the mountains beneath the surface, issue forth in the plains, where, especially when shadowed by trees, they are as delicious as those of the mountains themselves. Besides the above signs for ascertaining in what places water may be found, are the following : when a place abounds with the slender bulrush, the wild willow, the alder, the withy, reeds, ivy, and other plants of a similar sort, which neither spring up nor flourish without moisture. For these plants usually grow about lakes,'which, being lower than the other parts of a country, receive both the rain water and that of the district, through the winter, and, from their size, preserve the moisture for a longer period. On these, however, we must not rely. But in those districts and lands, no lakes being near, where the plants in question grow spontaneously, there we may search. In places where these signs do not appear, the following plan must be adopted. Dig a hole three feet square, and at least five feet deep, and in it, about sunset, place a brazen or leaden basin, or larger vessel, if one be at hand. It must be rubbed over with oil inside and inverted, and the upper part of the excavation is to be covered with reeds or leaves; on these the earth is to be thrown. On the following day let it be opened, and if the inside of the vase be covered with damp anA drops of water, water will be there found. If the vase placed in the pit be of unburnt clay, having been covered as before directed, when uncovered it will be damp, and perhaps destroyed by the moisture. A fleece of wool being placed in the same pit, if, on tlie following day, water can be expressed from it, the existence of water in the place is indicated, and that in abundance. Also, if a trimmed l am p full of oil be lighted, and placed in the covered pit, and on the following day it be not exhausted, but still retain uncon-

181 sumed, and some of the wick and oil present a humid appearance, it shows that water will be found there, inasmuch as heat invariably draws the moisture towards it. Moreover, if in such place a fire he made on the ground, and the ground, when heated, throw out cloudy vapours, water will he found in it. These experiments having been made, and the requisite indications being manifest, a well is to be sunk on the spot; and if the head of the spring he found, many other wells are to be dug round about it, and, by means of under-cuttings, connected with it so as to concentrate them. The spring-heads, however, are chiefly to he sought in mountains and northern districts, because, in those situations, they are generally sweeter, more wholesome, and more copious, on account of their being sheltered from the rays of the sun, of the trees and shrubs in those places being in greater abundance, and of the sun’s rays coming obliquely on them, so that the moisture is not carried off. Valleys in the midst of mountains receive a very large proportion of rain, and from the closeness of their woods, as well from the shade which the trees afford, added to the snow, which so long remains on them, allow it to percolate through their strata, and thus arrive at the foot of the mountain, when, issuing forth, it becomes the source of a river. On the contrary, in a champaign country, much water will not probably he found; or if it should, it will not be wholesome, because the great power of the sun, unobstructed by shade, attracts and carries off all humidity from the plains ; and were even the water to appear, the air would attract and dissipate the lightest, subtlest, and wholesomest parts, and leave the heaviest, most unpleasant, and most unwholesome in the spring.

182 - CHAPTER II. OF E A I N WAT EE. Water collected from showers possesses wholesome qualities, because it consists of the lightest and most subtle particles of all springs, which, cleansed by the action of the air, and loosened by the tempests, descend upon the earth : and the reason why showers do not fall so often upon plains as they do on mountains or their vicinity is, because the vapours ascending from the earth at sunrise, to whatever part of the heavens they incline, drive the air before them, and, being in motion, receive an impetus from the air which rushes after them. The air rushing on, and driving in every direction the vapour before it, creates gales, and blasts, and eddies of wind. Hence the winds; wherever they travel, extract from springs, rivers, marshes, and from the sea, when heated by the sun, condensed vapours, which rise and form clouds. These, borne up by the winds when they come against the sides of mountains, from the shock they sustain, as well as from storms, swell, and, becoming heavy, break and disperse themselves on the earth. The vapours, clouds, and exhalations which rise from the earth, seem to depend on its retention of intense heat, great winds, cold moisture, and its large proportion of water. Thus when, from the coolness of the night, assisted by the darkness, winds arise, and clouds are formed from damp places, the sun, at its rising, striking on the earth with great power, and thereby heating the air, raises the vapours and the dew at the same time. A corroboration of this may be seen in a hot bath; for it is absurd to suppose that there can be a spring above its ceiling; and yet that, when warmed by the heated air from the furnace, attracts the moisture from the pavement, whence it is carried up to the vaulting of the ceiling,

183 where it hangs. For hot vapours always ascend, and at first, from their lightness, do not fall down, hut as soon as condensed, their gravity prevents buoyancy, and they drop on the heads of the bathers. In the same manner the atmospheric air, when warmed by the sub, raises the moisture from all places, and gathers it to the clouds: for the earth acted upon by heat, drives out its moisture, as heat drives out perspiration from the human body. This is manifest from the winds, among which, those that blow from the coldest quarters, as the north, and the north-east, bring dry and pure air, but the south and other winds, which blow from the direction of the sun’s course, are very damp, and always bring showers with them, because they reach us heated by the torrid regions, and imbibing vapours from the countries they pass over, transport them to the northern quarters. That this is the case, is evident from an inspection of the sources of rivers, as marked in geographical charts ; as also from the descriptions of them, wherein we find that the largest, and greatest number are from the north. First, in India, the Ganges and Indus spring from Mount Caucasus : in Syria, the Tigris and Euphrates : in Asia, and especially in Pontus, the Borys- thenes, Hypanis and Tana'is: in Colchis, the Phasis: in France, the Bhone : in Belgium, the Bhine : southward of the Alps, the Timavus and Po : in Italy, the Tiber: in Maurusia, which we call Mauritania, the river Dyris, from Mount Atlas, which, rising in a northern region, proceeds westward to the lake Hep- tabolus, where, changing its name, it is called the Niger, and thence from the lake Fleptabolus, flowing under barren mountains, it passes in a southern direction, and falls into the Marsh Coloe, which encircles Meroe, a kingdom of the southern Ethiopians. From this marsh turning round near the rivers Astasoba, Astabora, and many others, it passes through mountains to the Cataract, and falling down towards the north it

184 passes between Elepbantis and Syene and the Thebaic Fields in Egypt, where it receives the appellation of the Nile. That the source of the Nile is in Mauritania, is certain, because on the other side of the Mount Atlas are, other* springs whose course is towards the western ocean, in which are found the ichneumon, the crocodile, and other animals and fishes of a similar nature, the hippopotamus excepted. Since, therefore, all the large known rivers in the world seem to flow from the north, and towards the land of Africa, because those are in the southern regions under the sun’s course, where there is little moisture, and but few springs and rivers, it follows that those sources which are in the north and northeast, are much better than others, unless they run over a sulphureous, aluminous, or bituminous soil, for their quality is thereby changed, and whether hot or cold, their water is then of bad smell and taste. It is not that water, by its nature, is hot, but when cold, it is heated by running over a hot soil, and issues warm from the earth through the different pores : it does not, however, long remain in that state, but soon becomes cold; whereas, if it were naturally hot, it would not so soon grow cool; for it does not lose its taste, smell, and colour, which, from the purity of its nature, remain unchanged and discoloured. CHAPTEK III. OF THE NATUEE OF VARIOUS WATERS. There are some hot springs from which water of an excellent flavour is procured, so pleasant to the taste* that it is inferior neither to that of the fountains of the Camaense nor of the Martian aqueduct. These are

185 er of 1 ® naturally so, on the following account. When fire is generated under ground, and the soil is heated all round, either from abundance of alum, bitumen, or sulphur, the hot vapour ascends to the upper parts, and, if there are therein springs of sweet water affected by its spreading through the pores, they grow hot, without injury to the flavour. There are also cold springs whose smell and taste are bad. These arise in the lower subterranean places, then pass through hot districts, and afterwards continuing their course for a considerable distance, are cold when they rise to the surface, and of a vitiated taste, smell, and colour. Such is the river Albula, in the Tiburtine way: such are the cold fountains in the lands of Ardea, both of a similar smell, which is like sulphur: such, also, are found in other places. But these, though cold, seem, nevertheless, to boil: for, falling from a high place on to a heated soil, and acted on by the meeting of the water and fire, they rush together with great violence and noise; and, apparently inflated by the violence of the compressed air, they issue boiling from the spring. Among them, however, those whose course is not open, but obstructed by stones or other impediments, are, by the force of the air through the narrow pores driven up to the tops of hills. Hence, those who think they have found springs at such a height as the tops of hills, are mistaken when they dig their wells. For as a brazen vase, not filled to the brim, but about two-thirds full of water, with a cover thereon, when subjected to the great heat of a fire communicates that heat to the water, this, from its natural porosity, receiving the heat and swelling out, not only fills the vase, but, raising the cover by the force of the steam, increases and boils over. If the cover be taken away, the steam passes off to the open air, and the water subsides. In the same manner, when springs are forced through narrow channels, the pressure of the air drives the bubbles of the water to the top;

186 but as soon as they come into wide open channels, the pores of the liquid having vent, it subsides and returns to its natural level. All hot springs are, therefore, medicinal; because boiling in the soils through which they pass, they acquire many virtues. Thus sulphureous waters restore, by their heat, those suffering under nervous complaints, by warming and extracting the vitious humours of the body. If any member of the body, either from paralysis or other malady, become useless, aluminous waters warm it, and introducing, through the open pores, the opposing power of heat, restore it, and thus it immediately regains its former strength. Bituminous waters, taken inwardly, act as purgatives, and are excellent for the cure of inward complaints. There is a species of cold nitrous spring like that at Pinna a city of the Vestini, at Cutilium, and other similar places, which, when taken, purges, and, in its passage through the bowels, diminishes schrophulous tumours. In those places where gold, silver, iron, brass, lead, and other similar substances, are excavated, very copious springs are found. These, however, are very pernicious. Indeed they produce effects contrary to those of the hot springs which emit sulphur, alum, and bitumen : for when taken inwardly, passing through the intestines, they affect the nerves and joints, and produce hard swellings on them. Hence the nerves are contracted by the swelling, in the direction of their length, and thus induce the cramp or the gout, because the vessels become saturated with hard gross cold particles. But there is a species of water, which, when not clear, has a foam, like a flower, swimming on its surface, of a colour similar to that of purple glass. It is known at Athens more particularly, and, from the places and springs in which it is found, it is conducted to the city and to the Piraeus; but, on account of the cause above-mentioned, no one drinks it, though it is in use for washing and other purposes. They,

187 therefore, to avoid its ill effects, drink the well water. The Troezenians are not able to escape this evil; for they have no other sort of water, except that of Cyb- delns. Hence, in their city, all, or at least the greatest part, of the inhabitants are affected with diseases in the feet. At Tarsus, a city of Cilicia, there is a river whose name is Cydnus, in which, if gouty persons steep their feet, they receive relief from it. There are, moreover, many other sorts of water, which have particular properties, as the Himera, in Sicily, which, when it departs from its source, is divided into two branches. That branch which flows towards .Etna, passing through a country of sweet humidity, is exceedingly soft; the other, its course being through land where salt is dug, has a salt taste. At Parsetonium, also, and on the road to the temple of Ammon, and at Casium in ..Egypt, there are marshy lakes containing so much salt, that it congeals on them. In many other places the springs, rivers and lakes, which run near salt-pits, are therefrom rendered salt. Others, running over veins of fat earth, issue forth impregnated with oil: as at Soloe, a city of Cilicia, a river called Liparis, in which those that swim or wash, are-, as it were, anointed by the water. In Ethiopia, also, there is a lake which anoints those that swim therein; and in India there is another, which, when the sky is clear, emits a great quantity of oil. At Carthage there is a spring, on the surface of which swims an oil of the smell of cedar dust, with which they anoint cattle. In the island of Zacynthus, and about Dyrrachium and Apollonia, are springs which throw up a great quantity of pitch with the water. The vast lake at Babylon, called the Asphaltic pool, contains floating bitumen, with which, and with bricks of baked earth, Semiram is built the wall round Babylon. At Joppa, also, in Syria, and in Numidian Arabia, are lakes of immense size, yielding large masses of bitumen, which are taken away by the inhabitants of the neighbourhood.

188 This is not, however, surprising ; for in that spot there are many quarries of hard bitumen : hence, when the water bursts out from this bituminous earth, it carries it therewith; and having come forth, the bitumen is separated from it and deposited. In Cappadocia, on the road between Mazaca and Tuana, there is a considerable lake, in which, if a piece of reed or any other substance be cast, and taken out on the following day, it will he found to have been turned into stone : but the part out of water will not have changed its quality. In the same manner, at Hierapolis, in Phrygia, a large head of hot water boils up, and is conducted by ditches round the gardens and vineyards. At the end of a year the ditches become incrusted with stone ; and hence, making yearly- cuts to the right and left, they carry off the incrustations, and use them for building field walls. This circumstance, as it appears to me, Avould naturally happen, if, in these spots, and in the land about, there be a juice or moisture whose nature is similar to that of rennet. For then, when this coagulating power issues forth from the earth, through the springs, congelation takes place by the heat of the sun and air, as is seen in salt-pits. Some springs are exceedingly bitter, from the bitterness of the juices of the earth; as the river Hypanis in Pontus, which, for the first forty miles from its source, is of very sweet flavour; but at a spot one hundred and sixty miles from its mouth, a very small spring falls into it, after which the Avhole body of the river becomes bitter; and this because the Avater flows through that sort of earth and veins from whence red lead is procured. These different flavours are dependent on the quality of the earth, as in the case of fruits. For if the roots of trees, of vines, or of other plants, did not produce fruit according to the quality of the earth and the nature of the moisture, the same sort of fruit would, in all places and countries, possess the same flavour. Whereas we see, that, in the island of Lesbos

the Protyran wine is made, in Mseonia the KaTaKeKav/ievLTr] (Catakecanmenitan), in Lydia the Melitan, in Sicily the Mamertine, in Campania the Falernian, at Terracina and Fnndi the Gsecuban; and in many other places a vast variety of sorts, of different qualities ; which could not be the case, hut that the moisture of the earth, penetrating the roots with the particular flavour it possesses, nourishes the tree, and, rising to the top of it, imparts to the fruit the flavour of the place and species. For if the soil and its moisture did not vary, neither would the reeds and rushes of Syria and Arabia be odoriferous, and the shrubs yield pepper, frankincense, and myrrh, nor would the laser grow only in Cyrene, but in all countries and in all places would the same sort of plants grow. For the varieties that are found in different situations and countries arise from the different climates, and the power of the sun, sometimes at a less and at other times at a greater distance; the effects of which are perceived, not only on the moisture of the earth, but on cattle and flocks. And these circumstances could not occur, if in every country the quality of the land did not depend on the sun’s power. In Boeotia on the rivers Cephisus and Melas, in Lucania on the Crathis, in Troy on the Xanthus, and on the springs and rivers of the Clazomenians, Erythrseans, and Laodiceans, the cattle, about the time of bearing, at the proper season of the year, are daily driven to drink ; and though themselves of a white colour, in some places they bring forth young of a brown colour, in others of dark brown, and in others of a black colour. Thus the property of a beverage, when it enters the body, communicates thereto its quality, of whatever sort that may be. Hence in the plains of Troy, on the banks of its river, from the flocks and cattle being yellow, the Trojans are said to have called the river Xanthus. Some sorts of water are mortal in their effects : these receive their quality from the poisonous moisture of the lands through which they

190 flow. Such is said to be the Neptunian spring at Ter- racina, of which those who thoughtlessly drank, lost their lives; hence the ancients are said to have stopped it up : and in the country of the Cychri, in Thrace, there is a lake, of which not only those who drink, but those who bathe therein die. In Thessaly, also, flows a spring which no cattle will drink, nor even approach: near it a shrub grows, which bears a purple flower. So, in Macedonia, where Euripides is interred, from the right and left of his tomb two streams unite : on one of them travellers usually halt to refresh themselves, on account of the excellence of the water : no one, however, approaches the stream on the other side of the monument, because its effects are said to he mortal. In Arcadia, also, the Nonacrian region contains extremely cold water, which drops from the mountains and rocks. It is called water of the Styx (Srvyos v8iop ); which neither silver, brass, nor iron vessels will hold, because it bursts and destroys them. Nothing preserves or contains it but the hoof of a mule : indeed it is said to have been conveyed, by Iolaus the son of Antipater, to the province where Alexander was, and to have been the cause of his death. In the Cottian Alps is a water which those who taste instantly die. In the Faliscan territory, on the Via Campana, and in the Cornetan division is a grove wherein a spring rises, containing bones of snakes, lizards, and other reptiles. There are other springs whose water is acid, as are those of the Lyncestis, and in Italy, of the Yelinus and of the Campana near Theanum, and in many other places, which, when drank, have the effect of dissolving the stone which forms in the bladder. This seems to arise from an acrid and acid moisture being under the earth, from which the waters acquire their acridity; and when introduced into the system, dissolve that with which they come in contact whether generated by deposition or concretion. That acids will have this effect, is clear, from the experiment on an egg, I

whose shell, when kept therein for some time, will he softened and dissolve. Lead, also, which is very flexible and heavy, if placed in a vessel and covered with acid, and there left open, will be dissolved, and become white lead. In the same way brass which is more solid by nature, if treated in the same way, will dissolve, and become verdigrease; and even pearls and flint stones, which neither iron nor fire can destroy, when submitted to its action, are dissolved and dissipated by an acid. With these facts before our eyes, we may fairly argue, that calculous disorders may be cured by acids, on account of their acridity. Some springs appear to be mixed with wine; as that in Paplilagonia, which, when taken, inebriate as wine. At ACqui, in Italy, and in the territory of the Medulli on the Alps, there is a species of water, the use of which produces swellings of the neck. In Arcadia, at the well-known city of Clitorium, is a cave flowing with water, of which those who drink become abstemious. At the spring is an epigram inscribed on stone, in Greek verses, to the following effect: that it is not fit for bathing, and also that it is injurious to the vine, because, near the spot, Melampus cured the daughters of Proetus of their madness, and restored them to reason. The epigram is as follows : Rustic, by Clitor’s stream who tak’st tby way, Should thirst oppress thee in the noon of day Drink at this fount, and in the holy keep Of guardian Naiads lead thy goats and sheep. But dip not thou thy hand, if vine inflame, Lest e’en the vapour chill thy fever’d frame ; Fly thou my sober spring. Melampus here Cleansed the mad Prcetides: what time the seer Arcadia’s rugged hills from Argos sought, With purifying power my stream was fraught. There is also in the island of Chios, a fountain, of which those who imprudently drink become foolish ; and thereover is incribed an epigram to the following purport ;

193 that though the water of the fountain might be pleasant to the taste, yet he who drank of it would lose his senses. The lines are thus : Sweet drops of cooling draught the spring supplies, But whoso drinks, his reason petrifies. At Susa, the capital of Persia, there is a fountain at which those who drink lose their teeth. On this also is written an epigram, stating that the water was excellent for washing, but that if drank it caused the teeth to fall out of their sockets. The verses are as follow : A dreaded spring you see, Yet if their hands, good stranger, Folks choose to wash, they’re free To do so without danger ; But if from your tongue’s tip, Just passing from the lip Into your hollow venter, This liquor pure should enter, Your tools for munching meat Straight on the ground will tumble, And leave their empty seat With toothless jaws to mumble. CHAPTER IV. OF THE QUALITIES OF WATERS IN CERTAIN PLACES. The quality of the water, in some places, is such, that it gives the people of the country an excellent voice for singing, as at Tarsus, Magnesia, and other countries. In Africa there is a city called Zama, which king Juba surrounded with double walls, and built a palace there; about twenty miles from which, is the town of Ismuc, whose territory is of vast extent. Though Africa is the

193 * is trit- pi# nursing mother of wild animals, and especially of serpents, in that territory none breed, and if any are brought there they immediately die ; and if earth from this place be removed to another, it has the same effect. This sort of earth is also found in the Balearic Isles, where, as I have heard, it has even a more extraordinary quality. C. Julius, the son of Masinissa, to whom the town and territory belonged, fought under Caesar the elder. Lodging in my house, our daily intercourse led us to discuss subjects of philology. On an occasion talking on the power of water and its virtues, he assured me that in the above territory there were springs of the same sort, and that persons horn there had excellent voices for singing; and that on this account persons went to the transmarine market to buy male and female slaves, whom they coupled for the purpose of procuring progeny, not only of excellent voice, but of great beauty. Thus has nature exhibited variety in all things, except the human body, which in every instance consists of earth; but therein are many sorts of fluids, as blood, milk, perspiration, urine, and tears. Wherefore, if in so small a portion of earth such variety exists, it is not surprising, that in the whole world an infinite variety of liquids are found, through whose veins a spring of water passing, becomes impregnated w 7 ith their quality before arriving at its head. Hence exist so many fountains of different sorts, arising, as well from the diversity of their situations, as from the quality of the countries, and the properties of the soils. Of some of these things I have been an eye-witness; of others I have read in Greek books, whose authors are Theophrastus, Timaeus, Posidonius, Hegesias, Herodotus, Aristides, and Metrodorus, who, with the greatest care and accuracy have described how the properties of places and the virtues of different waters, depend on the various climates of the earth. From these I have borrowed and copied into this book all that I thought necessary respecting the varieties of K

194 water, whereby, from the directions given, persons can more readily choose springs from which they may conduct water to cities and states, inasmuch as nothing is more necessary than water, for such is the nature of all animals, that if they do not receive a supply of grain, they can subsist on fruits, flesh, or fish, or something of those sorts ; but without water, neither the* body of an animal, nor even food itself can he raised, preserved, nor provided. The utmost diligence and labour, therefore, should he used in choosing springs, on which the health of mankind depends. CHAPTER Y. OF THE MEANS OF JUDGING OF WATER. The trial and proof of water are made as follows. If it he of an open and running stream, before we lay it on, the shape of the limbs of the inhabitants of the neighbourhood should be looked to and considered. If they are strongly formed, of fresh colour, with sound legs, and without blear eyes, the supply is of good quality. Also, if digging to a fresh spring, a drop of it be thrown into a Corinthian vessel made of good brass, and leave no stain thereon, it will be found excellent. Equally good that water will be, which, after boiling in a cauldron, leaves no sediment of sand or clay on the bottom. So if vegetables are quickly cooked over the fire in a vessel full of this water, it shows that the water is good and wholesome. Moreover, if the water itself, when in the spring is limpid and transparent, and the places over which it runs do not generate moss, nor reeds, nor other filth be near it, every thing about it having a clean appearance, it will be manifest by these signs, that such water is light and. exceedingly wholesome.

CHAPTER VI. OF LEVELLING, AND THE INSTRUMENTS USED FOR THAT PURPOSE. I shall now describe how water is to be conveyed to houses and cities, for which purpose levelling is necessary. This is performed either with the dioptra, the level (libra aquaria), or the chorobates. The latter instrument is however the best, inasmuch as the dioptra and level are often found to be incorrect. The chorobates is a rod about twenty feet in length, having two legs at its extremities of equal length and dimensions, and fastened to the ends of the rod at right angles with it; between the rod and the legs are cross pieces fastened with tenons, whereon vertical lines are correctly marked, through which corresponding plumb lines hang down from the rod. When the rod is set, these will coincide with the lines marked, and show that the instrument stands level. But if the wind obstructs the operation, and the lines are put in motion, so that one cannot judge by them, let a channel be cut on the top of the rod five feet long, one inch wide, and half an inch high, and let water be poured into it; if the water touch each extremity of the channel equally, it is known to be level. When the chorobates is thus adjusted level, the declivity may be ascertained. Perhaps some one who may have read the works of Archimedes will say that a true level cannot be obtained by means of water, because that author says, that water is not level, but takes the form of a spheroid, whose centre is the same as that of the earth. Whether the water have a plane or spheroidal surface, the two ends of the channel on the rod right and left, when the rod is level, will nevertheless sustain an equal height of water. If it be inclined towards one side, that end w'hich is highest will not suffer

196 tlie water to reach to the edge of the channel on the rule. Hence it follows, that though water poured in may have a swelling and curve in the middle, yet its extremities to the right and left will be level. The figure of the chorohates will he given at the end of the book. If there he much fall, the water will he easily conducted, hut if there he intervals of uneven ground, use must he made of substructions. CHAPTER VII. OF CONDUCTING WATER. Wateb is conducted in three ways, either in streams by means of channels built to convey it, in leaden pipes or in earthen tubes, according to the following rules. If in channels, the. structure must be as solid as possible, and the bed of the channel must have a fall of not less than half a foot to a length of one hundred. These channels are arched over at top, that the sun may strike on the water as little as possible. When they are brought home to the walls of the city a reservoir (castellum) is built, with a triple cistern attached to it to receive the water. In the reservoir are three pipes of equal sizes, and so connected that when the water overflows at the extremities, it is discharged into the middle one, in which are placed pipes for the supply of thepools and fountains ; in the second those for the supply of the baths, thus affording a yearly revenue to the people; in the third, those for the supply of private houses. This is to be so managed that the water for public use may never be deficient, for that cannot be diverted if the mains from the heads are rightly constructed. I have made this division in order that the rent which is collected from private individuals who are supplied with water, may be applied by the col-

lectors to tlie maintenance of the aqueduct. If hills intervene between the city walls and the spring head, tunnels under ground must be made preserving the fall above assigned; if the ground cut through be sandstone or stone, the channel may be cut therein, but if the soil be earth or gravel, side walls must be built, and an arch turned over, and through this the water may be conducted. The distance between the shafts over the tunnelled part is to be one hundred and twenty feet. If the water is to be brought in leaden pipes, a reservoir is first made near the spring, from whence to the reservoir in the city, pipes are laid proportioned to the quantity of water. The pipes must be made in lengths of not less than ten feet: hence if they be one hundred inches wide (centenarise), each length will weigh twelve hundred pounds ; if eighty inches (octogenarise), nine hundred and sixty pounds; if fifty inches (quinqua- genarise), six hundred pounds ; if forty inches (quadra- genarise), four hundred and eighty pounds; if thirty inches (tricenariae), three hundred and sixty pounds ; if twenty inches (vicenariae), two hundred and forty pounds; if fifteen inches (quinumdenum), one hundred and eighty pounds ; if ten inches (denum), one hundred and twenty pounds; if eight inches (octonum), ninety-six pounds ; if five inches (quinariae), sixty pounds. It is to be observed that the pipes take the names of their sizes from the quantity of inches in width of the sheets, before they are hent round : thus, if the sheet be fifty inches wide, before bending into a pipe, it is called a fifty-inch pipe ; and so of the rest. An aqueduct which is made of lead, should be thus constructed; if there be a proper fall from the spring head to the city, and hills high enough to cause an impediment do not intervene, the low intervals must be brought to a level by means of substructions preserving the fall directed for channel aqueducts, or by means of a circuitous course, provided it be not too much about; but if there be long valleys,

198 let it be laid according to the slope of the hill, and when it arrives at the bottom, let it be carried level by means of a low substruction as great a distance as possible ; this is the part called the venter, by the Greeks KoiXta  ; wdien it arrives at the opposite acclivity, the water therein being but slightly swelled on account of the length of the venter, it may be directed upwards. If the venter were not made use of in valleys, nor the level substruction, but instead of that the aqueduct were brought to an elbow, the water would burst and destroy the joints of the pipes. Over the venter long stand pipes should be placed, by means of which, the violence of the air may escape. Thus, those who have to conduct w r ater through leaden pipes, may by these rules, excellently regulate its descent, its circuit, the venter, and the compression of the air. It wall moreover be expedient, when the level of the fall from the spring is obtained, to build reservoirs at distances of twenty thousand feet from each other, because if damage occur to any part, it wall not then be necessary to take the whole w r ork to pieces, and the defective places will be more easily found. These reservoirs, liow r ever, are not to be made on a descent, nor on the venter, nor on a rise, nor, generally speaking, in valleys, but only on plains. But if the wrater must be conveyed more economically, the following means may be adopted. Thick earthen tubes are to be provided, not less than two inches in thickness, and tongued at one end, so that they may fit into one another. The joints are then to be coated with a mixture of quick lime and oil, and in the elbows made by the level part of the venter, instead of the pipe, must be placed a block of red stone, wdiich is to be perforated, so that the last length of inclined pipe, as v r ell as the first length of the level part may be received into it. Then, on the opposite side, where the acclivity begins, the block of red stone receives the last length of the venter,' and the first length of the rising pipe. Thus adjusting the direction of the tubes, hotli in the descents and acclivi-

199 ties, the work will never be dislodged. For a great rush of air is generated in an aqueduct, strong enough to break even stones, unless the water is softly and sparingly let down from the head, and unless in elbows or bending joints it be restrained by means of ligatures, or a weight of ballast. In other respects it is similar to one with leaden pipes. When the water is first let down from the head, ashes are put in which will stop those joints not sufficiently coated. Earthen pipes have these advantages, first as to the work ; next, that if damaged any one can repair it. Water conducted through earthen pipes is more wholesome than that through lead ; indeed that conveyed in lead must be injurious, because from it white lead is obtained, and this is said to be injurious to the human system. Hence, if what is generated from it is pernicious, there can be no doubt that itself cannot be a wholesome body. This may be verified by observing the workers in lead, who are of a pallid colour; for in casting lead, the fumes from it fixing on the different members, and daily burning them, destroy the vigour of the blood ; water should therefore on no account be conducted in leaden pipes if we are desirous that it should be wholesome. That the flavour of that conveyed in earthen pipes is better, is shown at our daily meals, for all those whose tables are furnished with silver vessels, nevertheless use those made of earth, from the purity of the flavour being preserved in them. If there be no springs from which water can be obtained, it is necessary to dig wells, on which every care is to be bestowed, and the utmost ingenuity and discretion used in the examination of the natural indications of the circumstances thereabout, inasmuch as the different sorts of soil which are met with, are many and various. That, like every other body, is composed of four elements ; first of earth itself; water, whence are the springs; heat, whence sulphur, alum, and bitumen are generated; and air, whence arise great vapours, which, piercing through the pores to the opening of wells, strike upon the excavators and suffocate

200 them by their natural influence, so that those who do not immediately escape lose their lives. To avoid this the following method may he adopted; a lighted lamp must be lowered; if it continue to burn, a man may safely descend, hut if the strength of the vapour extinguish it, then to the right and left of the well let air holes be dug, so that as it were through nostrils, the vapour may pass off. When this is done and we come to water, the well must he lined with a wall, but in such a manner as not to shut out the springs. If the soil be hard, and there he no veins of water found at the bottom, we must then have recourse to cisterns made of cement, in which water is collected from roofs and other high places. The cement is thus compounded; in the first place, the purest and roughest sand that can be had is to be procured; then material must be prepared of broken flint whereof no single piece is to weigh more than a pound, the lime must be very strong, and in making it into mortar, five parts of sand are to be added to two of lime, the flint work is combined with the mortar, and of it the walls in the excavation are brought up from the bottom, and shaped by wooden bars covered with iron. The walls being shaped, the earth in the middle is to be thrown out as low as the foot of the walls, and when levelled, the bottom is to be covered with the same materials to the requisite thickness. If these receptacles are made in two or three divisions, so that the water may be passed from one to another, it will he more wholesome for use; for the mud in it will be thus allowed to subside, and the water will be clearer, preserve its flavour, and be free from smell; otherwise it will be necessary to use salt for purifying it. In this book I have explained to my utmost ability the virtues and varieties of waters, their use and conveyance, and how their goodness may be ascertained; in the following hook I intend to describe the principles of gnomonics and the rules of dialling.

^^-.^•V.'■ i- ' ;' ‘"* «.-,•>. 5: f*4*V. '

s Ti lei am * s k i . in i lif< il ® sin au ; | tra j j »i j ta ; th ■ ■ fin ■ E ,

THE ARCHITECTURE OF MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO. BOOK THE NINTH. INTRODUCTION. The ancestors of the Greeks held the celebrated wrestlers who were victors in the Olympic, Pythian, Isthmian and Nemean games in such esteem, that, decorated with the palm and crown, they were not only publicly thanked, but were also, in their triumphant return to their respective homes, borne to their cities and countries in four horse chariots, and were allowed pensions for life from the public revenue. When I consider these circumstances, I cannot help thinking it strange that similar honours, or even greater, are not decreed to those authors who are of lasting service to mankind. Such certainly ought to be the case ; for the wrestler, by training, merely hardens his own body for the conflict; a writer, however, not only cultivates his own mind, but affords every one else the same opportunity, by laying down precepts for acquiring knowledge, and exciting the talents of his reader. What does it signify to mankind, that Milo of Crotona, and others of this class, should have been invincible, except that whilst living they were ennobled by their fellow countrymen ? On the other hand the doctrines of Pythagoras, Democritus, Plato, e 3

202 Aristotle, and other sages, the result of their daily application, and undeviating industry, still continue to yield, not only to their own country, hut to all nations, fresh and luscious fruit, and they, who from an early age are satiated therewith, acquire the knowledge of true science, civilize mankind, and introduce laws and justice, without which no state can long exist. Since, therefore, individuals as well as the public are so indebted to these writers for the benefits they enjoy, I think them not only entitled to the honour of palms and crowns, hut even to be numbered among the gods. I shall produce in illustration, some of their discoveries as examples, out of many, which are of utility to mankind, on the exhibition whereof it must be granted without hesitation that we are hound to render them our homage. The first I shall produce will be one of Plato, which will be found of the greatest importance, as demonstrated by him. CHAPTER I. OF THE METHOD OF DOUBLING THE AREA OF A SQUARE. If  there be an area or field, whose form is a square, and it is required to set out another field whose form is also to he a square, but double in area, as this cannot be accomplished by any numbers or multiplication, it may he found exactly by drawing lines for the purpose, and the demonstration is as follows. A square plot of ground ten feet long by ten feet wide, contains an hundred feet; if we have to double this, that is, to set out a plot also square, which shall contain two hundred feet, we must find the length of a side of this square, so that its area may he double, that is two hundred feet. By numbers

203 this cannot be done; for if the sides are made fourteen feet, these multiplied into each other give one hundred and ninety-six feet; if fifteen feet, they give a product of two hundred and twenty-five. Since, therefore, we cannot find them by the aid of numbers, in the square of ten feet a diagonal is to be drawn from angle to angle, so that the square may thereby be divided into two equal triangles of fifty feet area each. On this diagonal another square being described, it will be found, that whereas in the first square there were two triangles, each containing fifty feet, so in the larger square formed on the diagonal there will be four triangles of equal size and number of feet to those in the smaller square. In this way Plato showed and demonstrated the method of doubling the square, as the figure appended explains. CHAPTER II. OF THE METHOD OF CONSTRUCTING A RIGHT ANGLED TRIANGLE. Pythagoras demonstrated the method of forming a right angle without the aid of the instruments of artificers : and that which they scarcely, even with great trouble, exactly obtain, may be performed by his rules with great facility. Let three rods be procured, one three feet, one four feet, and the other five feet long ; and let them be so joined as to touch each other at their extremities ; they will then form a triangle, one of whose angles will be a right angle. For if, on the length ol each of the rods, squares be described, that whose length is three feet will have an area of nine feet; that of four, of sixteen feet; and that of five, of twenty-five feet: so that the number of feet contained in the two areas of the square of three and four feet added together, are equal

204 to those contained in the square, whose side is five feet. When Pythagoras discovered this property, convinced that the Muses had assisted him in the discovery, he evinced his gratitude to them by sacrifice. This proposition is serviceable on many occasions, particularly in measuring, no less than, in setting out the staircases of buildings, so that each step may have its proper height. For if the height from the pavement to the floor above he divided into three parts, five of those parts will he the exact length of the inclined line which regulates the blocks of which the steps are formed. Four parts, each equal to one of the three into which the height from the pavement to the floor was divided, are set off from the perpendicular, for the position of the first or lower step. Thus the arrangement and ease of the flight of stairs will he obtained, as the figure will show. CHAPTER III. OF THE METHOD OF DETECTING SILVER WHEN MIXED WITH GOLD. Though Archimedes discovered many curious matters which evince great intelligence, that which I am about to mention is the most extraordinary. Hiero, when he obtained the regal power in Syracuse, having, on the fortunate turn of his affairs, decreed a votive crown of gold to he placed in a certain temple to the immortal gods, commanded it to he made of great value, and assigned an appropriate weight of gold to the manufacturer. He, in due time, presented the work to the king, beautifully wrought, and the weight appeared to correspond with that of the gold which had been assigned for it. But a report having been circulated, that some of the gold had

205 lv <% ' nv mced 1 3  Propo, 1 en lie been abstracted, and that the deficiency thus caused had been supplied by silver, Hiero was indignant at the fraud, and, unacquainted with the method by which the theft might be detected, requested Archimedes would undertake to give it his attention. Charged with this commission, he by chance went to a bath, and being- in the vessel, perceived that, as his body became immersed, the water ran out of the vessel. Whence, catching at the method to be adopted for the solution of the proposition, he immediately followed it up, leapt out of the vessel in joy, and returning home naked, cried out with a loud voice that he had found that of which he was in search, for he continued exclaiming, in Greek, evprjKa, ( I have found it out). After this, he is said to have taken two masses, each of a weight equal to that of the crown, one of them of gold and the other of silver. Having prepared them, he filled a large vase with water up to the brim, wherein he placed the mass of silver, which caused as much water to run out as was equal to the bulk thereof. The mass being then taken out, he poured in by measure as much water as was required to fill the vase once more to the brim. By these means he found what quantity of water was equal to a certain weight of silver. He then placed the mass of gold in the vessel, and, on taking it out, found that the water which ran over was less, because, the magnitude of the gold mass was smaller than that containing the same weight of silver. After again filling the vase by measure, he put the crown itself in, and discovered that more water ran over then than with the mass of gold that was equal to it in weight; and thus, from the superfluous quantity of water carried over the brim by the immersion of the crown, more than that displaced by the mass, he found, by calculation, the quantity of silver mixed with the gold, and made manifest the fraud of the manufacturer. Let us now consider the discoveries of Archytas the Tarentine, and

306 Eratosthenes of Cyrene, who, by the aid of mathematics, invented many things useful to mankind; and though for other inventions they are remembered with respect, yet they are chiefly celebrated for their solution of the following problem. Each of these, by a different method, endeavoured to discover the way of satisfying the response of Apollo of Delos, which required an altar to be made similar to his, hut to contain double the number of cube feet, on the accomplishment of which, the island was to he freed from the anger of the gods. Archytas obtained a solution of the problem by the semicylinder, and Eratosthenes by means of a proportional instrument. The pleasures derivable from scientific investigations, and the delight which inventions afford when we consider their effects, are such that I cannot help admiring the works of Democritus, on the nature of things, and his commentary, entitled XupoTovrjrov, wherein he sealed with a ring, on red wax, the account of those experiments he had tried. The discoveries, therefore, of these men, are always at hand, not only to correct the morals of mankind, but also to be of perpetual advantage to them. But the glory of the wrestler and his body soon decay, so that neither whilst in vigour, nor afterwards by his instructions, is he of that service to society which the learned are by publication of their sentiments. Since honours are not awarded for propriety of conduct, nor for the excellent precepts delivered by authors, their minds soaring higher, are raised to heaven in the estimation of posterity, they derive immortality from their works, and even leave their portraits to succeeding ages. For, those who are fond of literature, cannot help figuring to themselves the likeness of the poet Ennius, as they do that of any of the gods. So also those who are pleased with the verses of Accius, think they have himself, not less than the force of his expressions, always before them. Many even in after ages will fancy themselves contending with Lucretius on

207 the nature of things, as with Cicero on the art of rhetoric. Many of our posterity will think that they are in discourse with Yarro when they read his work on the Latin language : nor will there be wanting a number of philologers, who, consulting in various cases the Greek philosophers, will imagine that they are actually talking with them. In short, the opinions of learned men who have flourished in all periods, though absent in body, have greater weight in our councils and discussions than were they even present. Hence, O Caesar, relying on these authorities, and using their judgment and opinions, I have written these books ; the first seven related to buildings, the eighth to the conduct of water, and in this I propose treating on the rules of dialling, as de- ducible from the shadow produced by the rays of the sun from a gnomon, and I shall explain in what proportions it is lengthened and shortened. CHAPTER IY. OF THE UNIVERSE AND THE PLANETS. It is clearly by a divine and surprising arrangement, that the equinoctial gnomons are of different lengths in Athens, Alexandria, Rome, Piacenza, and in other parts of the earth. Hence the construction of dials varies according to the places in which they are to be erected; for from the size of the equinoctial shadow, are formed analemmata, by means of which the shadows of gnomons are adjusted to the situation of the place and the lines which mark the hours. By an analemma is meant a rule deduced from the sun’s course, and founded on observation of the increase of the shadow from the winter solstice, by means of which, with mechanical operations

208 and the nse of compasses, we arrive at an accurate knowledge of the true shape of the world. By the world is meant the whole system of nature together with the firmament and its stars. This continually turns round the earth and sea on the extreme points of its axis, for in those points the natural power 'is so contrived that they must he considered as centres, one above the earth and sea at the extremity of the heavens by the north stars, the other opposite and below the earth towards the south; moreover in these central points as round the centres of wheels, which the Greeks call ttoXoi, the heavens perpetually revolve. Thus the earth and sea occupy the central space. Hence from the construction, the polar centre is raised above the earth in the northern part, whilst that in the southern part, which is underneath, is hidden from our view by the earth, and through the middle obliquely and inclined to the south, is a large band comprising the twelve signs, which, by the varied combination of t^ie stars being divided into twelve equal parts, contains that number of representations of figures. These are luminous, and with the firmament and the other stars and constellations, make their circuit round the earth and sea; all these, visible as well as invisible, have their fixed seasons, six of the signs turning above the earth, the remaining six below it; which latter are hidden by the earth. Six of them, however, are always above the earth ; for the portion of the last sign, which by the revolution is depressed below the earth and hidden by it, is on the opposite side equal to that of a fresh sign emerging from darkness by the force of the moving power; since it is the same power and motion which cause the rising and setting at the same moment. As these signs are twelve in number, each occupies a twelfth part of the heaven, and they move continually from east to west: and through them in a contrary course, the moon, Mercury, Venus, the sun itself, Mars,

209 Jupiter and Saturn, as if ascending, pass through the heavens from west to east in different orbits. The moon making her circuit in twenty-eight days and about one hour, and thus returning to the sign from which she departed, completes the lunar month. The sun, in the course of a month, passes through the space of one sign which is a twelfth part of the heavens; hence in twelve months going through the twelve signs, when he has returned to that sign from which he set out, the period of a year is completed: hut that circle which the moon passes through thirteen times in twelve months, the sun passes through only once in the same time. The planets Mercury and Venus nearest the rays of the sun, move round the sun as a centre, and appear sometimes retrograde and sometimes progressive, seeming occasionally, from the nature of their circuit, stationary in the signs. This may he observed in the planet Venus, which when it follows the sun, and appears in the heavens with great lustre after his setting, is called the evening star; at other times preceding him in the morning before sunrise, it is called the morning star. Wherefore these planets at times appear as if they remained many days in one sign, whilst at other times they pass rapidly from one to another; but though they do not remain an equal number of days in each sign, the longer they are delayed in one the quicker they pass through the succeeding one, and thus perform their appointed course : in this manner it happens that being delayed in some of the signs, when they escape from the retention, they quickly pass through the rest of their orbit. Mercury revolves in the heavens in such a manner, that passing through the several signs in three hundred and sixty days, he returns to that sign from which he set out, remaining about thirty days in each sign. The planet Venus, as soon as she escapes from the influence of the sun’s rays, runs through the space of one sign in forty days ; and what she loses by

210 stopping a long time in one sign, she makes np by her quick passage through others. She completes her circuit through the heavens in four hundred and eighty-five days ; by which time she has returned to the sign from whence she set out. Mars, on about the six hundred and eighty-third day, completes the circuit of the signs, and returns to his place; and if, in any sign, he move with a greater velocity, his stationary state in others equalizes the motion, so as to bring him round in the proper number of days. Jupiter moving also in contrary rotation, but with less velocity, takes three hundred and sixty days to pass through one sign; thus lengthening the duration of his circuit to eleven years and three hundred and twenty-three days before he returns to the sign in which he was seen twelve years before his setting out. Lastly, Saturn, remaining thirty- one months and some days in each sign, returns to his point of departure at the end of twenty-nine years, and about one hundred and sixty days, or nearly thirty years- Hence, the nearer he is to the extremity of the universe, the larger does his circuit appear, as well as the slower his motion. All those which make their circuit above that of the sun, especially when they are in trine aspect, do not advance, hut, on the contrary, are retrograde, and seem to stop till the sun passes from the trinal sign into another. Some are of opinion, that this happens on account of their great distance from the sun, on which account their paths not being sufficiently lighted, they are retarded by the darkness. But I am not of that opinion, since the brightness of the sun is perceptible, evident and unobscured throughout the system, just as it appears to us, as well when the planets are retrograde as when they are stationary. If, then, our vision extends to such a distance, how can we imagine it possible to obscure the glorious splendour of the planets ? It appears more probable, that it is the heat which draws and attracts all things towards itself: we, in fact, see the heat raise the fruits

211 of the earth to a considerable height, and the spray of waters from fountains ascend to the clouds by the rainbow: in the same manner the excessive power of the sun spreading his rays in a triangular form, attracts the planets which follow him, and, as it were, stops and restrains those which precede him, preventing them from leaving him, and, indeed, forcing them to return to him, and to remain in the other trinal sign. One may perhaps ask, whence it happens that the sun, by its heat, causes a detention in the fifth sign from itself, rather than in the second or third, which are nearer. This may be thus explained. Its rays diverge through the heavens in lines which form a triangle whose sides are equal. Those sides fall exactly in the fifth sign. For if the rays fell circularly throughout the system, and were not bounded by a triangular figure, the nearer places would be absolutely burnt. This seems to have struck the Greek poet, Euripides; for he observes, that those places more distant from the sun are more intensely heated than those temperate ones that are nearer to him : hence, in the tragedy of Phaethon, he says, Kaiei ra Troppw,  ra 8’iyyvs evKar  eya. (The distant places burn, those that are near are temperate.) If, therefore, experience, reason, and the testimony of an ancient poet, prove it, I do not see how it can be otherwise than I have above shown. Jupiter performs his circuit between those of Mars and Saturn:,thus it is greater than that of Mars, but less than that of Saturn. In short, all the planets, the more distant they are from the extremity of the heaven, and the nearer their orbit is to the earth, seem to move swifter; for those which have a smaller orbit, often pass those above them. Thus, on a wheel similar to those in use among potters, if seven ants be placed in as many channels round the centre, which are necessarily greater in proportion to their distance therefrom, and the ants are forced to make their circuits in these channels, whilst the wheel moves round in an opposite direction, they will

assuredly complete their circuit, notwithstanding the contrary motion of the wheel; and, moreover, that nearest the centre will perform his journey sooner than he who is travelling in the outer channel of the wheel, who, though he move with equal velocity, yet, from the greater extent of his circuit, will require a longer time for its completion. It is even so with the planets, which, each in its particular orbit, revolve in a direction contrary to the motion of the heavens, although, in their diurnal motion, they are carried backwards by its rotation. The reason why some planets are temperate, some hot, and others cold, appears to he this; that all fire has a flame, whose tendency is upward. Hence the sun warms, by his rays, the air above him, wherein Mars moves, and that planet is therefore heated thereby. Saturn, on the contrary, who is near the extremity of the universe, and comes in contact with the frozen regions of the heavens, is exceedingly cold. Jupiter, however, whose orbit lies between those of the two just mentioned, is tempered by the cold and heat, and has an agreeable and moderate temperature. Of the band comprising the twelve signs, of the seven planets, and their contrary motions and orbits, also of the manner and time in which they pass from one sign into another, and complete their circuits, I have set forth all that I have learnt from authors. I will now speak of the moon’s increase and wane, as taught by the ancients. JBerosus, who travelled into Asia from the state or country of the Chaldeans, teaching his doctrines, maintained that the moon was a ball, half whereof was luminous, and the remaining half of a blue colour; and that when, in its course, it approached the sun ; attracted by the rays and the force of the heat, it turned its bright side in that direction, from the sympathy existing between light and light; whence, when the sun is above.it, the lower part, which is not luminous, is not visible, from the similarity of its colour to the air. When thus perpendicular to

213 the sun’s rays, all the light is confined to its upper surface, and it is then called the new moon. When it passes towards the east, the sun begins to have less effect upon it, and a thin line on the edge of its bright side emits its splendour towards the earth. This is on the second day: and thus, from day to day, advancing in its circuit, the third and fourth days are numbered: but, on the seventh day, when the sun is in the west, the moon is in the middle, between the east and the west; and being distant from the sun half the space of the heavens, the luminous half side will be towards the earth. Lastly; when the sun and the moon are the whole distance of the heavens from each other, and the former, passing towards the w r est, shines full on the moon behind it in the east, being the fourteenth day, it is then at the greatest distance from its rays, and the complete circle of the whole orb emits its light. In the remaining days it gradually decreases till the completion of the lunar month, and then returns to re-pass under the sun; its monthly rays being determined by the number of days. I shall now subjoin what Aristarchus, the Samian mathematician, learnedly wrote on the subject, though of a different nature. He asserted, that the moon possesses no ligTit of its own, but is similar to a speculum, which receives its splendour from the sun’s rays. Of the planets, the moon makes the smallest circuit, and is nearest to the earth; whence, on the first day of its monthly course, hiding itself under the sun, it is invisible ; and when thus in conjunction with the sun, it is called the new moon. The following day, which is called the second, removing a little from the sun, it receives a small portion of light on its disc. When it is three days distant from him, it has increased, and become more illuminated; thus daily elongating from him, on the seventh day, being half the heavens distant from the western sun, one half of it shines, namely, that half which is lighted by the sun. On the

214 fourteenth day, being diametrically opposite to the sun, and the whole of the heavens distant from him, it becomes full, and rises as the sun sets ; and its distance being the whole extent of the heavens, it is exactly opposite to, and its whole orb receives, the light of the sun. On the seventeenth day, when the sun rises, it inclines towards the west; on the twenty-first day, when the sun rises, the moon is about mid-heaven, and the side next the sun is enlightened, whilst the other is in shadow. Thus advancing every day, about the twenty-eighth day it again returns under the rays of the sun, and completes its monthly rotation. I will now explain how the sun, in his passage through a sign every month, causes the days and hours to increase and diminish. CHAPTER Y. OF THE SUN’S COURSE THROUGH THE TWELVE SIGNS. When the sun has entered the sign of Aries, and run through about an eight part of it, it is the vernal equinox. When he has arrived at the tail of Taurus and the Pleiades, for which the fore part of the Bull is conspicuous, he has advanced in the heavens more than half his course towards the north. From Taurus, he enters into Gemini, at the time when the Pleiades rise, and being more over the earth increases the length of the days. From Gemini entering into Cancer, which occupies the smallest space in the heavens, and coming to the eighth division of it he determines the solstice, and moving forward arrives at the head and breast of Leo, which are parts properly within the division assigned to Cancer. From the breast of Leo and the boundaries of Cancer,

215 the sun moving through the other parts of Leo, has by that time diminished the length of the day, as well as of his circuit, and resumes the equal motion he had when in Gemini. Hence from Leo passing to Yirgo and proceeding to the indented part of her garment, he contracts his circuit, which is now equal to that which it had in Taurus. Proceeding then from Yirgo through the indentation which includes the beginning of Libra, in the eighth part of that sign, the autumnal equinox is completed ; the circuit being then equal to that in the sign Aries. When the sun enters into Scorpio at the setting of the Pleiades, he diminishes, in passing to the southern parts, the length of the days ; and from Scorpio passing to a point near the thighs of Sagittarius, he makes a shorter diurnal circuit. Then beginning from the thighs of Sagittarius, which are in Capricornus, at the eighth part of the latter he makes the shortest course in the heavens. This time from the shortness of the days, is called Brum a (winter) and the days Brumales. From Capricornus passing into Aquarius, the length of the days is increased to that of those when he was in Sagit. tarius. From Aquarius he passes into Pisces at the time that the west wind blows ; and his course is equal to that he made in Scorpio. Thus the sun travelling through these signs at stated times, increases and diminishes the duration of the days and hours. I shall now treat of the other constellations on the right and left of the zodiac, as well those on the south as on the north side of the heavens.

216 CHAPTER YI. OF THE NORTHERN CONSTELLATIONS. The Great Bear, which the Greeks call apKTos,  and also eXUrj,  has his keeper behind him. Not far distant is the constellation of the Virgin, on whose right shoulder is a very brilliant star, called by us Provindemia Major, and by the Greeks 7rpoTpvyero%  which shines with extraordinary lustre and cojour. Opposite to it is another star, between the knees of the Keeper of the Bear, which bears the name of Arcturus. Opposite the head of the Bear, across the feet of the Twins, is Auriga (the charioteer) standing on the point of the horns of the Bull, and on one side, above the left horn towards the feet of Auriga, there is a star called the hand of Auriga; on the other side the Goat’s Kids and the Goat over the left shoulder. Above both the Bull and the Ram stands Perseus, which on the right extends under the bottom of the Pleiades, on the left towards the head of the Ram; his right hand rests on the head of Cassiopeia, the left holding the Gorgon’s head by its top over the Bull, and laying it at the feet of Andromeda. Above Andromeda are the Fishes, one under her belly, and the other above the back of the Horse; the brilliant star in the belly of the Horse is also in the head of Andromeda. The right hand of Andromeda is placed on the figure of Cassiopeia, the left upon the north eastern fish. Aquarius stands on the head of the horse; the ears of the horse turn towards the knees of Aquarius, and the middle star of Aquarius is also common to Capricornus. Above on high are the Eagle and the Dolphin, and near them Sagitta. On the side is the Swan, the right wing of which is turned towards the hand and sceptre of Cepheus, the left leans on Cassiopeia, and under the tail of Avis the feet of the horse are hidden. Above Sagittarius, Scorpio, and Libra,

217 comes the Serpent, the point of whose snout touches the Crown; in the middle of the Serpent is Ophiuchus, who holds the Serpent in his hands, and with his left foot treads on the head of the Scorpion. Near the middle of the head of Ophiuchus is the head of the Kneeler; their heads are easily distinguished from being marked with luminous stars. The foot of the Kneeler is placed on the temple of the Serpent, which is entwined between the two northern bears, called Septentriones. The Dolphin is a short distance from them. Opposite the hill of the Swan is the Lyre. The Crown lies between the shoulders of the Keeper and the Kneeler. In the northern circle are two Bears, with their shoulders and breasts in opposite directions ; of these the Less is called Kvvoaovpa, and the Larger eA.1/07 by the Greeks. Their heads are turned downwards, and each of their tails is towards the other’s head, for both their tails are raised, and that which is called the polestar, is that near the tail of the Little Bear. Between these tails, as we have before stated, extends the Serpent, who turns round the head of that nearest to him, whence he takes a folding direction round the head of the smaller hear, gnd then spreading under his feet, and rising up, returns and folds from the head of the Less to the Greater Bear, with his snout opposite and showing the right temple of his head. The feet of Cepheus are also on the tail of the Small Bear; towards which part more above our heads, are the stars which form the equilateral triangle above Aries. There are many stars common to the Lesser Bear and Cepheus. I have enumerated the constellations which are in the heavens to the right of the east between the zodiac and the north. I shall now describe those which are distributed on the southern side to the left of the east. L

218 CHAPTER VII. OF THE SOUTHERN CONSTELLATIONS. First, under Capricornus is the southern Fish looking towards the tail of the Whale. Between it and Sagittarius is a vacant space. The Altar is under the sting of Scorpio. The fore parts of the Centaur are near Libra and Scorpio, and he holds in his hand that constellation which astronomers call the Beast. Near Virgo, Leo, and Cancer, the Snake stretches through a range of stars, and with its foldings encircles the region of Cancer, raising its snout towards Leo and on the middle of its body supporting the cup; its tail extends towards the hand of Virgo, and upon that is the Crow ; the stars on its hack are all equally luminous. Under its belly, at the tail, is the Centaur. Near the cup and Leo is the ship Argo, whose prow is hidden, but the mast and parts about the steerage are clearly seen. The Ship and its poop touch the tip of the Dog’s tail. The smaller Dog is behind the Twins at the head of the Snake, and the larger follows the smaller Dog. Orion lies transversely under, pressed on by the hoof of the Bull, holding a shield in his left hand and with the club in his right hand raised towards Gemini; near his feet is the Dog at a short distance following the Hare. Below Aries and Pisces is the Whale, from whose top to the two Fishes a small group of stars, which the Greeks call c ~Epfir)86vrj, regularly extends, and this ligature of the Fishes twisting considerably inwards, at one part touches the top of the Whale. A river of stars, in the shape of the river Po, begins from the left foot of Orion. The water that runs from Aquarius takes its course between the head of the southern Fish and the tail of the Whale. I have explained the constellations displayed and formed in the heavens by nature with a divine intelligence, according to the system of the philosopher Democritus, confining

219 myself to those whose rising and setting are visible. Some, however, such as the two Bears turning round the pole, never set nor pass under the earth. So also, the constellations about the south pole, which from the obliquity of the heavens are under the earth, are always hidden, and their revolution never brings them above the horizon. Whence the interposition of the earth prevents a knowledge of their forms. The constellation Canopus proves this, which is unknown in these countries, though well known to merchants who have travelled to the extremity of Egypt and other boundaries of the earth. I have described the true circuit of the heavens about the earth, the arrangement of the twelve signs, also that of the northern and southern constellations, because therefrom, from the opposite course of the sun through the signs, and from the shadows of gnomons at the equinoxes, are formed the diagrams of ana- lemmata. The rest which relates to astrology, and the effects produced upon human life by the twelve signs, the five planets, the sun and the moon, must be left to the discussions of the Chaldeans, whose profession it is to cast nativities, and by means of the configurations of the stars to explain the past and the future. The talent, the ingenuity, and reputation of those who come from the country of the Chaldeans, are manifest from the discoveries they have left us in writing. Berosus was the first of them. He settled in the island and state of Cos, and there established a school. Afterwards came Antipater and Achinapolus, which latter not only gave rules for predicting a man’s fate by a knowledge of the time of his birth, but even by that of the moment wherein he was conceived. In respect of natural philosophy Thales the Milesian, Anaxagoras of Clazomense, Pythagoras the Samian, Xenophanes of Colophon, Democritus the Ab- derite, have published systems which explain the mode in which Nature is regulated, and how every effect is produced. Eudoxus, Endsemon, Callippus, Melo, Philip, Hipparchus* Aratus, and others, following in the steps

220 of the preceding, found, by the use of instruments, the times of the rising and setting of the stars and the changes of the seasons, and left treatises thereon for the use of posterity. Their learning will he admired by mankind, because, added to the above, they appear as if by divine inspiration to have foretold the weather at particular seasons of the year. For a knowledge of these matters reference must therefore he made to their labours and investigation. CHAPTER VIII. OF THE CONSTEUCTION OF DIALS ;BY THE ANALEMMA. From the doctrines of the philosophers above mentioned, are extracted the principles of dialling, and the explanation of the increase and decrease of the days in the different months. The sun at the times of the equinoxes, that is when he is in Aries or Libra, casts a shadow in the latitude of Rome equal to eight-ninths of the length of the gnomon. At Athens the length of the shadow is three-fourths of that of the gnomon. At Rhodes five- sevenths ; at Tarentum nine-elevenths ; at Alexandria three-fifths ; and thus at all other places the shadow of the gnomon at the equinoxes naturally differs. Hence in whatever place a dial is to be erected, we must first obtain the equinoctial shadow. If, as at Rome, the shadow be eight-ninths of the gnomon, let a line be drawn on a plane surface, in the centre whereof is raised a perpendicular thereto; this is called the gnomon, and from the line on the plane in the direction of the gnomon, let nine equal parts be measured. Let the end of the ninth part A, be considered as a centre, and extending the compasses from that centre to the extremity B

221 of the said line, let a circle be described. This is called the meridian. Then of those nine parts between the plane and the point of the gnomon, let eight be allotted to the line on the plane, whose extremity is marked C. This will be the equinoctial shadow of the gnomon. From the point C through the centre A let a line be drawn, and it will represent a ray of the sun at the equinoxes. Extend the compasses from the centre to the line on the plane, and mark on the left an equidistant point E, and on the right another, lettered I, and join them by a line through the centre, which will divide the circle into two semicircles. This line by mathematicians is called the horizon. A fifteenth part of the whole circumference is to be then taken, and placing the point of the compasses in that point of the circumference E, where the equinoctial ray is cut, mark with it to the right and left the points G and H. From these, through the centre, draw lines to the plane where the letters T and R are placed, thus one ray of the sun is obtained for the winter, and the other for the summer. Opposite the point E, wall be found the point I, in which a line drawn through the centre, cuts the circumference ; and opposite to G and H the points K and L, and opposite to C, F, and A, will be the point N. Diameters are then to be drawn from G to L, and from H to K. The lower one will determine the summer, and the upper the winter portion. These diameters are to be equally divided in the middle at the points M and 0, and the points being thus marked, through them and the centre A a line must be drawn to the circumference, where the letters P and Q are placed. This line will be perpendicular to the equinoctial ray, and is called in mathematical language, the Axon. From the last obtained points as centres (M and 0) extending the compasses to the extremity of the diameter, two semicircles are to be described, one of which will be for summer, the other for winter. In respect of those points where the two

222 parallels cut that line which is called the horizon; on the right hand is placed the letter S, and on the left the letter V, and at the extremity of the semicircle, lettered G, a line parallel to the Axon is drawn to the extremity on the left, lettered H. This parallel line is called La- cotomus. Finally, let the point of the compasses be placed in that point where this line is cut by the equinoctial ray, and letter the point X, and let the other point be extended to that where the summer ray cuts the circumference, and he lettered H. Then with a distance equal to that from the summer interval on the equinoctial point, as a centre, describe the circle of the months, which is called Manacus. Thus will the analemma be completed. Having proceeded with the diagram and its formation, the hour lines may be projected on the ana- lemma according to the place, either by winter lines, or summer lines, or equinoctial lines, or lines of the months, and as many varieties and species of dials as can be desired, may be constructed by this ingenious method. In all the figures and diagrams the effect will be the same, that is to say, the equinoctial as well as the solstitial days, will always he divided into twelve equal parts. These matters, however, I pass over, not from indolence, but to avoid prolixity. I will merely add, by whom the different species and figures of dials were invented ; for I have not been able to invent a new sort, neither will I pass off the inventions’ of others as my own. I shall therefore mention those of which I have any information, and by whom they were invented.

223 CHAPTER IX. OF VAEIOUS DIALS, AND THEIE INVENTOES. Berosus the Chaldean, was the inventor of the semicircle, hollowed in a square, and inclined according to the climate. Aristarchus the Samian, of the Scaphe or Hemisphere, as also of the discus on a plane. The Arachne was the invention of Eudoxus the astrologer, though some attribute it to Apollonius. The Plinthium or Lacunar, an example of which is to be seen in the Circus Flaminius, was invented by Scopas the Syracusan. The sort called IIpos ra IcnopovfjLeva , by Parmenio. That called IIpos irav Kkip-a,  by Theodosius and Andrias. The Pelicinon by Patrocles. The Cone by Dionysodorus. The Quiver by Apollonius. The persons above mentioned not only invented other sorts ; but the inventions of others have come down to us, such as the Gonarche, the Engonatos, and the Antiboreas. Many also have left instructions for constructing the portable pendulous dial. When any one understands the formation of the ana- lemma, he will be enabled, by reference to their writings, to suit them to any place. By the same writers have been discovered the method of making water dials. Ctesibius Alexandrinus was the first who found out the properties of the wind, and of pneumatic power, the origin of which inventions is worthy of being known. Ctesibius, whose father was a barber, was horn at Alexandria. Endowed with extraordinary talent and industry, he acquired great reputation by his taste for his mechanical contrivances. Wishing to suspend a mirror in his father’s shop, in such a way that it might be easily raised and lowered by means of a concealed cord, he used the following expedient. Fixing a wooden tube under the beam, he attached pulleys to it upon which the cord passed and made an angle in descending into the

wood which, he had hollowed out: there he placed small tubes, within which a leaden hall attached to the cord was made to descend. It happened that the weight, in passing through the narrow parts of the tube, pressed on the inclosed air, and violently driving out at its mouth the quantity of air compressed in the tubes, produced by obstruction and contact a distinct sound. Ctesibius having thus observed that by the compression and concussion of the air, sounds might be produced, he made use of the discovery in his application of it to hydraulic machines, to those automata which act by the power of inclosed water, to lever and turning engines, and to many other entertaining devices, but principally to water dials. First he made a perforation in a piece of gold or a smooth gem, because these materials are not liable to be worn by the action of the water, nor to collect filth, by which the passage of the water might be obstructed: the water flowing through the hole equably, raises an inverted bowl, called by the workmen phellos, or the tympanum, with which are connected a rule and revolving drum wheels with perfectly equal teeth, which teeth, acting on one another, produce revolutions and measured motion. There are other rules and other wheels, toothed in a similar manner, which acted upon by the same force in their revolutions, produce different species of motion, by which figures are made to move, cones are turned round, stones or oviform bodies are ejected, trumpets sounded, and similar conceits effected. On these also, either on columns or pillars, the hours are marked, to which a figure, holding a wand and rising from the lower part, points throughout the day, the increase and decrease whereof is daily and monthly adjusted, by adding or taking away certain wedges. To regulate the flow of the water, stoppers are thus formed. Two cones are prepared, one convex, the other concave, and rounded so as to fit exactly into each other. A rod, by elongating these, or bringing them

225 together, increases or diminishes the flow of water into the vessel. In this manner, and according to the principles of this machine, water-dials for winter are constructed. If the addition or removal of the wedges should not be attended by a correspondent increase or decrease in the days, for the wedges are frequently imperfect, it is to be thus remedied. Let the hours from the analemma be placed on the column transversely, and let the lines of the months be also marked thereon. The column is to turn round, so that, in its continual revolution, the wand of the figure, as it rises, points to the hours, and, according to the respective months, makes the hours long or short. Other kinds of winter- dials are made, which are called Anaporica. They are constructed as follows. With the aid of the analemma the hours are marked by brazen rods on their face, beginning from the centre, whereon circles are drawn, showing the limits of the months. Behind these rods a wheel is placed, on which are measured and painted the heavens and the zodiac with the figures of the twelve celestial signs, by drawing lines from the centre, which mark the greater and smaller spaces of each sign. On the back part of the middle of the wheel is fixed a revolving axis, round which a pliable brass chain is coiled, at one of whose ends a phellos or tympanum hangs, which is raised by the water, and at the other end a counterpoise of sand equal to the weight of the phellos. Thus as the phellos ascends by the action of the water, the counterpoise of sand descends and turns the axis, as does that the wheel, whose rotation causes at times the greater part of the circle of the zodiac to be in motion, and at other times the smaller; thus adjusting the hours to the seasons. Moreover in the sign of each month are as many holes as there are days in it, and the index which in dials is generally a representation of the sun, shows the spaces of the hours; and whilst passing from one hole to another, it completes the period of the l 3

226 month. Wherefore, as the sun passing through the signs, lengthens and shortens the days and hours, so the index of the dial, entering by the points opposite the centre round which the wheel turns, by its daily motions, sometimes in greater, at other times in less periods, will pass through the limits of the months and days. The management of the water, and its equable flow, is thus regulated. Inside, behind the face of the dial, a cistern is placed, into which the water is conveyed by a pipe. In its bottom is a hole, at whose side is fixed a brazen tympanum, with a hole in it, through which the water in the cistern may pass into it. Within this is inclosed a lesser tympanum attached to the greater, with male and female joints rounded, so that the lesser tympanum turning within the greater, similar to a stopple, fits closely, though it moves easily. Moreover, on the lip of the greater tympanum are three hundred and sixty-five points, at equal distances. On the circumference of the smaller tympanum a tongue is fixed, whose tip points to the marks. In this smaller tympanum a proportionable hole is made, through which the water passes into the tympanum, and serves the work. On the lip of the large tympanum, which is fixed, are the figures of the celestial signs; above, is the figure of Cancer, and opposite to it, below, that of Capri- cornus. On the right of the spectator is Libra, on his left Aries. All the other signs are arranged in the spaces between these, as they are seen in the heavens. Thus, when the sun is in the portion of the circle occupied by Capricornus, the tongue stands in that part of the larger tympanum where Capricornus is placed, touching a different point every day: and as it then vertically bears the great weight of the running water, this passes with great velocity through the hole into the vase, which, receiving it, and being soon filled, diminishes and contracts the lengths of the days and hours. When, by the diurnal revolu-

m tion of the lesser tympanum, the tongue enters Aquarius, all the holes fall perpendicular, and the flow of the water being thus lessened, it runs off more slowly; whence the vase receiving the water with less velocity, the length of the hours is increased. Thus, going gradually through the points of Aquarius and Pisces, as soon as the hole of the small tympanum touches the eighth part of Aries, the water flow's more gently, and produces the equinoctial hours. From Aries, through the spaces of Taurus and Gemini, advancing to the upper points where the Crab is placed, the hole or tympanum touching it at its eighth division, and arriving at the summit, the power is lessened; and hence running more slowly, its stay is lengthened, and the solstitial hours are thereby formed. When it descends from Cancer, and passes through Leo and Virgo, returning to the point of the eighth part of Libra, its stay is shortened by degrees, and the hours diminished, till, arriving at the same point of Libra, it again indicates the equinoctial hours. The hole being lowered through the space of Scorpio and Sagittarius, in its revolution it returns to the eighth division of Capricornus, and, by the velocity of the water, the winter hours are produced. To the best of my ability I have explained the construction and proportions of dials, so that they may be easily set up. It now remains for me to speak of machines, and the principles which govern them. These will be found in the following book, and will complete this Treatise on Architecture.

0 .1 '/XOj; i : 4^;y ]

THE ARCHITECTURE OF MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO. BOOK THE TENTH. INTRODUCTION. In the magnificent and spacious Grecian city of Ephesus an ancient law was made by the ancestors of the inhabitants, hard indeed in its nature, hut nevertheless equitable. When an architect was entrusted with the execution of a public work, an estimate thereof being lodged in the hands of a magistrate, his property was held, as security, until the work was finished. If, when finished, the expense did not exceed the estimate, he was complimented with decrees and honours. So when the excess did not amount to more than a fourth part of the original estimate, it was defrayed by the public, and no punishment was inflicted. But when more than one- fourth of the estimate was exceeded, he was required to pay the excess out of his own pocket. Would to God that such a law existed among the Roman people, not only in respect of their public, but also of their private buildings, for then the unskilful could not commit their depredations with impunity, and those who were the most skilful in the intricacies of the art would follow the profession. Proprietors would not be led into an

extravagant expenditure so as to cause ruin ; architects themselves, from the dread of punishment, would he more careful in their calculations, and the proprietor would complete his building for that sum, or a little more, which he could afford to expend. Those who can conveniently expend a given sum on any work, with the pleasing expectation of seeing it completed would cheerfully add one-fourth more; but wdien they find themselves burdened with the addition of half or even more than half of the expense originally contemplated, losing their spirits, and sacrificing what has already been laid out, they incline to desist from its completion. Nor is this an evil which occurs in buildings alone, but also in the shows of gladiators in the Forum, and in the scenes of plays exhibited by the magistrates, in which neither delay nor hindrance is admitted, since there is a necessity for their being completed by a certain time. Thus the seats for viewing the shows, the machinery for drawing the Vela, and the contrivances for shifting the scenes, must all be prepared by a given day, that the people may not be disappointed. And in the preparation of all these much readiness and profound thought must be exercised, because they cannot be executed without machinery, and the application of varied and extensive studies. Since, therefore, this is the case, it does not seem foreign to our purpose, carefully and diligently to explain those principles on which a work should be formed previous to commencing it. But as neither the law nor custom compels the adoption of such a practice, and the prsetors and sediles are bound every year to provide the machinery for the sports, it appeared to me, O Emperor, highly expedient, as in the foregoing books I have treated on buildings, to explain in this which closes the treatise, the principles upon which such machines are constructed.

CHAPTER I. OF MACHINES AND ENGINES. A machine is a combination of materials capable of moving great weights. It derives its power from that circular application of motion which the Greeks call kvkXlkt] klv7}(tl’5. The first species is for scaling (scan soria), which the Greeks call aKpofiariKos.  The second, wherein the wind is the moving power, is, by the Greeks, called 7rvevfxariKbr [xovcnKos (canon musicus) ; upon which, lengthwise, are channels, four in number, if the instrument be tetrachordal, six if hexachordal, and eight if octochordal. In each channel are fixed stops, that are

248 connected with iron finger-boards; on pressing down which, the communication between the chest and the channels is opened. Along the channels is a range of holes corresponding with others on an upper table, called 7riW£ in Greek. Between this table and the canon, rules are interposed, with corresponding holes well oiled, so that they may be easily pushed up and return; they are called pleuritides, and are for the purpose of stopping and opening the holes along the channels, which they do by passing backwards and forwards. These rules have iron jacks attached to them, and being united to the keys, when those are touched they move the rules. Over the table there are holes through which the wind passes into the pipes. Bings are fixed in the rules, for the reception of the feet of the organ-pipes. From the barrels run pipes joined to the neck of the w 7 ind-chest, which communicate with the holes in the chest, in which pipes are closely fitted valves ; these, when the chest is supplied with wind, serve to close their orifices, and prevent its escape. Thus, when the levers are raised, the piston-rods are depressed to the bottom of the barrel, and the dolphins turning on their pivots, suffer the valves attached to them to descend, thus filling with air the cavities of the barrels. Lastly; the pistons in the barrels being alternately raised and depressed with a quick motion, cause the valves to stop the upper holes : the air, therefore, which is spent, escapes into the pipes, through which it passes into the wind-chest, and thence, by its neck, to the box. By the quick motion of the levers still compressing the air, it finds its way through the apertures of the stops, and fills the channels with wind. Hence, when the keys are touched by hand, they propel and repel the rules, alternately stopping and opening the holes, and producing a varied melody founded upon the rules of music. I have done my utmost to give a clear explanation of a complex machine. This has been no easy task, nor, perhaps, shall

249 I be understood, except by those who are experienced in matters of this nature. Such, however, as comprehend but a little of what I have written, would, if they saw the instrument, be compelled to acknowledge the skill exhibited in its contrivance. CHAPTER XIY. OF MEASURING A JOURNEY. Let us now consider an invention by no means useless, and delivered to us by the ancients as ingenious, and by means of which, when on a journey hy land or sea, one may ascertain the distance travelled. It is as follows. The wheels of the chariot must be four feet diameter ; so that, marking a certain point thereon, whence it begins its revolution on the ground, when it has completed that revolution, it will have gone on the road over a space equal to twelve feet and a half. This being adjusted on the inner side of the nave of the wheel, let a drum-wheel be securely fixed, having one small tooth projecting beyond the face of its circumference; and in the body of the chariot let a small box be fastened, with a drum-wheel placed to revolve perpendicularly, and fastened to an axle. The latter wheel is to be equally divided, on its edge, into four hundred teeth, corresponding with the teeth of the lower drum-wheel; besides the above, the upper drum-wheel has on its side one tooth projecting out before the others. Above, in another enclosure, is a third horizontal wheel toothed similarly, and so that the teeth correspond with that tooth which is fixed to the side of the second wheel. In the third wheel just described are as many holes as are equal to the number of miles in an usual day’s journey. It does not, m 3

250 however, signify, if they be more or less. In all the holes let small balls be placed, and in the box or lining let a hole be made, having a channel, through which each ball may fall into the box of the chariot, and the brazen vessel placed under it. Thus, as the wheel proceeds, it acts on the first drum-wheel, the tooth of which, in every revolution, striking the tooth of the upper wheel, causes it to move on; so that when the lower wheel has revolved four hundred times, the upper wheel has revolved only once, and its tooth, which is on the side, will have acted on only one tooth of the horizontal wheel. Now as in four hundred revolutions of the lower wheel, the upper wheel will only have turned round once, the length of the journey will be five thousand feet, or one thousand paces. Thus, by the dropping of the balls, and the noise they make, we know every mile passed over; and each day one may ascertain, by the number of balls collected in the bottom, the number of miles in the day’s journey. In navigation, with very little change in the machinery, the same thing may be done. An axis is fixed across the vessel, whose ends project beyond the sides, to which are attached wheels four feet diameter, with paddles to them touching the water. That part of the axis within the vessel has a wheel with a single tooth standing out beyond its face; at which place a box is fixed with a wheel inside it having four hundred teeth, equal and correspondent to the tooth of the first.wheel fixed on the axis. On the side of this, also, projecting from its face, is another tooth. Above, in another box, is enclosed another horizontal wheel, also toothed, to correspond with the tooth that is fastened to the side of the vertical wheel, and which, in every revolution, working in the teeth of the horizontal wheel, and striking one each time, causes it to turn round. In this horizontal wheel holes are made, wherein the round balls are placed; and in the box of the wheel is a hole with a channel to it, through which

the ball descending without obstruction, falls into the brazen vase, and makes it ring. Thus, when the vessel is on its way, whether impelled by oars or by the wind, the paddles of the wheels, driving back the water which comes against them with violence, cause the wheels to revolve, whereby the axle is also turned round, and consequently with it the drum-wheel, whose tooth, in every revolution, acts on the tooth in the second wheel, and produces measured revolutions thereof. Wherefore, when the wheels are carried round by the paddles four hundred times, the horizontal wheel will only have made one revolution, by the striking of that tooth on the side of the vertical wheel, and thus, in the turning caused by the horizontal wheel every time it brings a ball to the hole it falls through the channel. In this way, by sound and number, the number of miles navigated will be ascertained. It appears to me, that I have completed the description in such a manner that it will be easy to comprehend the structure of the machine, which will afford both utility and amusement in times of peace and safety. CHAPTER XY. OF CATAPULTS AND SCORPIONS. I shall now proceed to an explanation of those instruments which have been invented for defence from danger, and for the purposes of self-preservation; I mean the construction of scorpions, catapultse, and balistse, and their proportions. And first of catapultse and scorpions. Their proportions depend on the length of the arrow which the instrument is to throw, a ninth part of whose length is assigned for the sizes of the holes in the capitals through which the cords are stretched,

that retain the arms of the catapultse. The height and width of the holes in the capital are thus fashioned. The plates (tabulae) which are at the top and bottom of the capital, and which are called parallels (paralleli) are equal in thickness to one hole, in width to one and three-quarters, and at their extremities to one hole and a half. The side posts (parastatse) right and left, exclusive of the tenons four holes high and five thick, the tenons three-quarters of a hole. From the hole to the middle post also three-quarters of a hole, the width of the middle post one hole and a quarter, its thickness one hole. The space wherein the arrow is placed in the middle of the post, the fourth part of a hole. The four angle pieces which appear on the sides and front, are strengthened with iron hoops fastened with copper or iron nails. The length of the channel which is called oTp!£ in Greek, is nineteen holes. That of the slips (regulse) which lie on the right and left of the channel, and which some persons call buccuhe, is also nineteen holes, their height and width half a hole. Two other slips are fixed for attaching the windlass, three holes long and half a hole wide. The thickness of a slip is called camillum, or according to others the dove-tailed box, and is of the dimension of one hole, its height half a hole. The length of the windlass is eight holes and an eighth. The roller nine holes wide. The length of the epitoxis is three-quarters of a hole, and its thickness one-quarter. The chelo or manucla is three holes long, its length and thickness three-quarters of a hole. The length of the bottom of the channel sixteen holes, its width and thickness each three-quarters of a hole. The small column (columella) with its base near the ground eight holes, the breadth of the plinth in which the small column is fixed three-quarters of a hole, its thickness three-twelfths. The length of the small column up to the tenon twelve holes; three-quarters of a hole wide, and five-sixths of a hole thick. The three

253 braces are nine holes long, half a hole wide, and a sixth of a hole thick; the length of the tenon one hole. The length of the head of the small column is one hole and three-quarters. The width of the fore-piece (antefixa) is three-eighths of a hole, its thickness one hole. The smaller back column, which in Greek is called avTifiaais, is eight holes long, one hole and a half wide, and three- twelfths of a hole thick. The base (subjectio) is twelve holes, and its breadth and thickness the same as that of the smaller column. The chelonium or pillow as it is called, over the smaller column, two holes and a half; also two holes and a half high, and one hole and three- quarters wide. The mortices (carcliesia) in the axles are two holes and a half; their thickness also two holes and a half, and their width one hole and a half. The length of the transverse pieces with the tenons is ten holes, their width one hole and a half, their thickness ten holes. The length of the arm is seven holes, its thickness at bottom three-twelfths, and at top half a hole. The curve part eight holes. All these proportions are appropriate ; some, however, add to them, and some diminish them; for if the capitals are higher than the width, in which case they are called anatona, the arms are shortened : so that the tone being weakened by the height of the capital, the shortness of the arm may make the stroke more powerful. If the height of the capital be less, in which case it is called catatonum, the arms must be longer, that they may be the more easily drawn to, on account of the greater purchase; for as a lever four feet long raises a weight by the assistance of four men, if it be eight feet long, two men will raise the weight; in like manner arms that are longer are more easily drawn to than those that are shorter.

254 CHAPTER XYI. OF THE CONSTEUCTION OF THE BALISTA. I have explained the structure of catapultse, their parts and proportions. The constructions of balistae are various and different, though contrived to produce similar effects. Some of these are worked by windlasses, others by systems of pulleys, others by capstans, and others by wheels: no balista, however, is made without regard to the weight of the stones it is intended to throw. Hence the rules will only be understood by those who are acquainted with arithmetical numbers and their powers. For instance, holes are made in the capitals, and through them are brought the cords, made either of woman’s hair, or of gut, which are proportioned to the weight of the stone that the balista is to throw, as in the catapultas the proportions are derived from the length of the arrow. But that those who are not masters of geometry and arithmetic, may be prepared against delay on the occasions of war, I shall here state the results of my own experience as well as what I have learnt from masters, and shall explain them, by reducing the Greek measures to their correspondent terms in our own. CHAPTER XVII. OF THE PEOPOETIONS OF THE BALISTA. A balista capable of throwing a stone of two pounds should have the hole (foramen) in the capital five digits wide; for a stone of four pounds, six digits; for a stone of six pounds, seven digits ; for a stone of ten pounds, eight digits; for a stone of twenty pounds, ten digits;

255 for a stone of forty pounds, twelve digits and nine-sixteenths ; for a stone of sixty pounds, thirteen digits and one-eighth ; for one of eighty pounds, fifteen digits ; for one of one hundred and twenty pounds, one foot and a half and a digit and a half; for one of a hundred and sixty pounds, two feet ;  for one of a hundred and eighty pounds, two feet and five digits; for one of two hundred pounds, two feet and six digits; for one of two hundred and ten pounds, two feet and seven digits: and lastly, for one of two hundred and fifty pounds, eleven feet and a half. Having thus determined the size of the hole, which in Greek is called Trepirp^ros, a sight hole (scutula) is described two holes and a quarter in length, and two holes and one-sixth wide. Let the line described be bisected, and when so bisected, let the figure be obliquely turned till its length be equal to one-sixth part, and its width on which it turns that of the fourth part of a hole. In the part where the curvature is, at which the points of the angles project, and the holes are turned, the contractions of the breadth return inwardly, a sixth part. The hole must be as much longer as the epizygis is thick. When it has been described, the extremity is to be so divided that it may have a gentle curvature. Its thickness must be nine-sixteenths of a hole. The stocks are made equal to two holes and a quarter, the width to one hole and three-quarters, the thickness, exclusive of that part which is inserted into the hole, one hole and a half; the width at the extremity, one hole and a sixteenth ; the length of the side posts, five holes and nine- sixteenths ; the curvature one-half of a hole, the thickness four-ninths ; in the middle the breadth is increased as it was near the hole above described; its breadth and thickness are each five holes ; its height one-quarter of a hole. The length of the slip on the table is eight holes, and it is to be half a hole wide and thick. The length of the tenon two holes and a sixth, and its thickness one hole: the curvature of the slip is to be one-six-

256 teenth and five-quarters of a sixteenth; the breadth and thickness of the exterior slip the same ; its length will be found by the turning, and the width of the side post and its curvature one-sixteenth : the upper are equal to the lower slips, that is one-sixteenth: the transverse pieces of the table two-thirds and one-sixteenth of a hole: the length of shaft of the small ladder (climacis) thirteen holes, its thickness tliree-sixteenths : the breadth of the middle interval is a quarter of a hole, its thickness five- thirty-seconds of a hole : the length of the upper part of the climacis near the arms, where it is joined to the table, is to be divided into five parts ; of these, two are given to that part which the Greeks call (the chest), the width one-sixteenth, the thickness one-quarter, the length three holes and an eighth, the projecting part of the chest half a hole. The pteregoma (or wing), one- twelfth of a hole and one sicilicus. The large axis, which is called the cross front, is three holes ; the width of the interior slips, one-sixteenth of a hole ; its thickness five-forty-eighths of a hole : the cheek of the chest serves to cover the dove-tail, and is a quarter of a hole: the shaft of the climacis five-sixths of a hole and twelve holes and a quarter thick: the thickness of the square piece which reaches to the climacis is five-twelfths, at its ends one-sixteenth: the diameter of the round axis must be equal to the clielos, but near its turning points three- sixteenths less. The length of the spur is one-twelfth and three-quarters ; its width at bottom one-sixteenth, and its width at top a quarter and one-sixteenth. The base, which is called Za^pa , is a ninth of a hole long; the piece in front of the base (antibasis) four holes and one-nintli; the width and thickness of each are to be the ninth of a hole. The half column is a quarter of a hole high, and its width and thickness half a hole ; as to its height, that need not be proportioned to the hole, but made, however, of such size as may be fit for the purpose. Of the arm the length will be six holes, its thick-

ness at bottom half a hole ; at the bottom one-twelfth of a hole. I have now given those proportions of the cata- pultse and balistse, which I consider most useful; I shall not, however, omit to describe, as well as I can by writing, the manner of preparing them with cords twisted of gut and hair. CHAPTER XVIII. OF THE PREPARATION OF THE BALISTiE AND CATAPULTS. Beams of considerable length must be procured, upon which are fixed cheeks in which the axles are retained ; in the middle of those beams holes are made, into which are received the capitals of the catapultse, well tightened with wedges, so that the strain will not move them. Then brazen stocks are fixed for the reception of the capitals, in which are the small iron pins which the Greeks call eTrio-^tSes. The ends of the ropes pass through the holes of the capitals, and brought through on the other side, they are then passed round the axle of the windlass, which is turned by the aid of levers, till the ropes, both drawn tight, give the same tone when struck by the hand. Then they are confined at the holes with wedges, to prevent their slipping. Being passed through to the other side, they are in a similar way tightened hy the levers and axles till the tones are similar. Thus by the use of the wedges, catapultse are adjusted, according to the effect of musical tones on the

258 CHAPTEB XIX. OF MACHINES FOR ATTACK. I have said as much as I could on these matters ; it now remains for me to treat of those things relating to attacks, namely, of those machines with which generals take and defend cities. The first engine for attack was the ram, whose origin is said to have been as follows. The Carthaginians encamped in order to besiege Cadiz, and haying first got possession of one of the towers, they endeavoured to demolish it, hut having no machines fit for the purpose, they took a beam, and suspending it in their hands, repeatedly battered the top of the wall with the end of it, and having first thrown down the upper courses, by degrees they destroyed the whole fortress. After that, a certain workman of Tyre, of the name of Pephasmenos, turning his attention to the subject, fixed up a pole and suspended a cross piece therefrom after the method of a steelyard, and thus swinging it backwards and forwards, levelled with heavy blows the walls of Cadiz. Cetras the Chalcedonian, was the first who added a base to it of timber moveable on wheels, and covered it with a roof on upright and cross pieces: on this he suspended the ram, covering it with hulls’ hides, so that those who were employed therein in battering the walls might be secure from danger. And inasmuch as the machine moved but slowly, they called it the tortoise of the ram. Such was the origin of this species of machines. But afterwards, when Philip, the son of Amintas, besieged Byzantium, Polydus the Thessalian used it in many and simple forms, and by him were instructed Diades and Chsereas, who fought under Alexander. Diades has shown in his writings that he was the inventor of ambulatory towers, which he caused to be carried from one place to another by the army, in

pieces, as also of tlie auger and the scaling machine, by which one may step on to a wall ; as also the grappling hook, which some call the crane (gras). He also used a ram on wheels, of which he has left a description in writing. He says that no tower should be built less than sixty cubits high, nor than seventeen wide, and that its diminution at top should be one-fifth of the width of the base : that the upright pieces of the tower should be one foot and three-quarters at bottom, and half a foot at top: that it should contain ten floors, with windows on each side. That the greatest tower that is constructed may be one hundred and twenty cubits high, and twenty- three and a half wide, diminishing at the top one-fifth of its base ; the upright piece one foot at bottom, and half a foot at top. The large tower is made with twenty floors, and to each floor there is a parapet of three cubits, covered with raw hides to protect it from the arrows. The construction of the tortoise ram is similar : it was thirty cubits wide, and, exclusive of the roof, sixteen high. The height of the roof from the eaves to the ridge, seven cubits. On the top thereof in the centre rose a small tower, not less than twelve cubits wide : it was raised with four stories, on the upper of which the scorpions and catapultee were placed, and in those below was kept a large store of water, to extinguish the flames in case it should be fired. In it was placed the machine for the ram, which the Greeks call KpioSoK-q, wherein was the round smooth roller on which the ram worked backwards and forwards by means of ropes, and produced great effect. This, like the tower, was covered with raw hides. He describes the auger (terebra) thus : the machine is made like a tortoise, as in those for the reception of the catapultse and balistse, and in the middle thereof is a channel on the pilasters fifty cubits long, one high, and across it an axle. In front, on the right and left, are two pulleys, by means of which is moved a beam with an iron point at its end, which

260 works in the channel. Under the channel are rollers, which give it an easier and stronger motion. Above the beam an arch is turned to cover the channel, and receive the raw hides with which the machine is covered. I do not describe the grappling machine, because I consider it of very little use. I perceive that he only promises to explain, which however he does not do, the construction of the ladder called eVi/3d0pa by the Greeks, and the other marine machines for hoarding ships. Having described the construction of the machines as Diades directs, I shall now explain it in a way that I think will be useful, and as taught me by my masters. CHAPTEK XX. OF THE TORTOISE FOR FILLING DITCHES. The tortoise contrived for filling up ditches, which also affords an access to the walls, is thus made. A base, called by the Greeks' eo-ydpa, is prepared twenty-five feet square, with four cross pieces. These are tied in by two other pieces, one-twelfth high, and one-lialf wide, distant from each other about a foot and a half, and under each of their intervals are placed the naves of wheels, called in Greek d/xa£o7ro8es, within which the axles of the wheels turn in iron hoops. The naves are so made that they have holes in their heads, in which the handspikes being received, are made to turn them. The naves thus revolving, it may be moved forward or backward, to the right or left, or diagonally, as wanted. Above the base are placed two beams, projecting six feet on each side ; round the projections of which two other beams are fixed in front, seven feet long, and their width

and thickness as described for the base. Upon this frame which is to he morticed, posts are placed, nine feet high, exclusive of their tenons, one foot and a palm square, and a foot and a half distant from each other. These are tied in at top by means of morticed beams. Above these beams are braces, with tenons, the end of one being let into the next to the height of nine feet, and over the braces is a square piece of timber, by which they are connected. They also are kept together by side pieces, and are covered with planks of palm, in preference to other wood: if those are not to be procured, by other wood of a strong nature, pine and ash, however, excepted ; for they are weak and easily ignited. About the. planking are placed gratings, made of slender twigs recently cut, and closely interwoven ; and then the whole machine is covered with raw hides, as fresh as can be procured, doubled and stuffed with seaweed or straw steeped in vinegar, in order that it may resist the strokes of the balistse and the attacks of fire. CHAPTER XXI. OF OTHER SORTS OF TORTOISES. There is another species of tortoise, which is just the same as that above described, except in respect of the braces. This has a parapet and battlements of boarding, and above, an inclined pent-house round it, tied in at top with plank and hides firmly fastened. Over these is a layer of clay with hair, of such thickness as to prevent the machine taking fire. These machines may be made with eight wheels, if need be, and if the nature of the place require it. The tortoises made for undermining, called by the Greeks opv yes, are similar to those already

262 described; but tbeir fronts are formed on a triangular plan, so that the weapons from the wall may not fall direct on the faces, but gliding off from them, the excavators within may be secure from danger. It does not appear to me foreign to our purpose to explain the proportions and constructions of the tortoise made by Agetor the Byzantine. Its base was sixty feet long, its width eighteen. The upright pieces which rose above the framing, were four in number ; they were in two lengths, joined, each thirty-six feet high, one foot and one palm in thickness, and in width one foot and a half. The base had eight wheels, on which it was moved; their height was six feet and three-quarters, their thickness three feet, composed of three pieces of wood dove-tailed together, and tied with plates of cold wrought iron. These turned on naves, or hamaxopodes, as they are called. Above the surface of the cross pieces which were on the base, upright posts were erected, eighteen feet and a quarter high, three-quarters wide, and three- twelfths thick, and one and three-quarters apart. Above them were beams all round, which tied the machine together ; they were one foot and a quarter wide, and three- quarters thick. Over these the braces were placed, and were twelve feet high. Above the braces was a beam which united the framing. They had also side pieces fixed transversely, on which a floor, running round them, covered the parts below. There was also a middle floor above the small beams, where the scorpions and cata- pultae were placed. Two upright pieces were also raised, joined together, thirty-five feet long, a foot and a half thick, and two feet wide, united at their heads, dove-tailed into a cross beam, and by another in the middle, morticed between two shafts and tied with iron hooping, above which were alternate beams between the uprights and the cross piece, firmly held in by the cheeks and angle pieces. Into the framing were fixed two round and smooth axles, to which were fastened the

263 ropes that held the ram. Over the heads of those who worked the ram was a pent-house, formed after the manner of a turret, where two soldiers could stand secure from danger, and give directions for annoying the enemy. The ram was one hundred and six feet long, a foot and a palm wide at the butt, a foot thick, tapering towards the head to a foot in width, and five-eighths in thickness. It was furnished with a hard iron beak like those fixed on galleys, from which went out four iron prongs about fifteen feet long, to fix it to the beam. Moreover, distributed between the foot and the head of the beam, four stout ropes were stretched eight inches thick, made fast like those which retain the mast of a ship between the poop arid the prow. To these were slung others diagonally, which suspended the ram at the distance of a palm and a foot from each other. The whole of the ram was covered with raw hides. At the further end of the ropes, towards the head, were four iron chains, also covered with raw hides, and it had a projection from each floor, framed with much skill, which was kept in its place by means of large stretched ropes, the roughness of which preventing the feet from slipping, made it easy to get thence on to the wall. The machine could be moved in six directions, straight forward, to the right and left, and from its extent it could he used on the ascending and descending slope of a hill. It could, moreover, he so raised as to throw down a wall one hundred feet in height: so, also, when moved to the right and left, it reached not less than one hundred feet. It was worked by one hundred men, and its weight was four thousand talents, or four hundred and eighty thousand pounds.

264 CHAPTER XXII. OF MACHINES FOR DEFENCE. I have explained what I thought most requisite respecting scorpions, catapultse, balistse, and also tortoises and towers, who invented them, and in what manner they ought to he made. It did not seem necessary to write on ladders, cranes, and other things of simpler construction ; these the soldiers of themselves easily make. Neither are they useful in all places, nor of the same proportions, inasmuch as the defences and fortifications of different cities are not similar: for machines constructed to assault the bold and impetuous, should he differently contrived to those for attacking the crafty, and still dissimilar, where the parties are timid. Whoever, therefore, attends to these precepts, will he able to select from the variety mentioned, and design safely, without further aid, such new schemes as the nature of the places and other circumstances may require. For the defence of a place or army, one cannot give precepts in writing, since the machines which the enemy prepares may not be in consonance with our rules ; whence oftentimes their contrivances are foiled by some ready ingenious plan, without the assistance of machines, as was the case with the Rhodians. Diognetus was a Rhodian architect, who, to his honour, on account of his great skill, had an annual fixed salary. At that period, an architect of Aradus, whose name was Callias, came to Rhodes, obtained an audience, and exhibited a model of a wall, whereon was a revolving crane, by means whereof he could suspend an Helepolis near the spot, and swing it within the walls. The wondering Rhodians, when they saw it, took away the salary from Diognetus, and conferred it on Callias. Immediately after this, king Demetrius, who, from his resolution, was sirnamed Polior-

965 cetes, prepared to wage war against tire Rhodians, and brought in his train Epimachus, a celebrated architect of Athens. This person prepared an helepolis of prodigious expense and of ingenious and laborious construction, whose height was one hundred and twenty-five feet, and its width sixty feet: he secured it, moreover, with haircloths and raw hides, so that it might securely withstand the shock of a stone of three hundred and sixty pounds weight, thrown from a balista. The whole machine weighed three hundred and sixty thousand pounds. Callias being* now requested by the Rhodians to prepare his machine against the helepolis, and to swing it within the wall, as he had promised, confessed he was unable. For the same principles do not answer in all cases. In some machines the principles are of equal effect on a large and on a small scale; others cannot be judged of by models. Some there are whose effects in models seem to approach the truth, but vanish when executed on a larger scale, as we have just seen. With an auger, a hole of half an inch, of an inch, or even an inch and a half, may be easily bored; but by the same instrument it would be impossible to bore one of a palm in diameter; and no one would think of attempting in this way to bore one of half a foot, or larger. Thus that which may be effected on a small or a moderately large scale, cannot be executed beyond certain limits of size. When the Rhodians perceived their error, and how shamefully they had wronged Diognetus; when, also, they perceived the enemy was determined to invest them, and the machine approaching to assault the city, fearing the miseries of slavery and the sacking of the city, they humbled themselves before Diognetus, and requested his aid in behalf of his country. He at first refused to listen to their entreaties ; but when afterwards the comely virgins and youths, accompanied by the priests, came to solicit his aid, he consented, on condition that if he succeeded in taking the machine, it should be his own property. This N

266 ■being agreed to, he ordered a hole to be made in that part of the wall opposite to the machine, and gave general as well as particular notices to the inhabitants, to throw on the other side of the hole, through channels made for the purpose, all the water, filth, and mud, that could be procured. These being, during the night, discharged through the hole in great abundance, on the following day, when the lielepolis was advanced towards the wall, it sunk in the quagmire thus created: and Demetrius, finding himself overreached by the sagacity of Diognetus, drew off his army. The Ehodians, freed from war by the ingenuity of Diognetus, gave him thanks publicly, and loaded him with honours and ornaments of distinction. Diognetus afterwards removed the helepolis within the walls, placed it in a public situation, and inscribed it thus : “ Diognetus presented this to the people out of the spoils of war.” Hence, in defensive operations, ingenuity is of more avail than machines. A similar circumstance occurred at Chios, where the enemy had got ready sambucse on board their ships; the Chians, during the night, threw into the sea, at the foot of their wall, earth, sand, and stones; so that when the enemy, on the following day, endeavoured to approach it, the ships got aground on the heaps thus created under water, without being able to approach the wall or to recede ; in which situation they were assailed with fiery missiles, and burnt. When, also, the city of Apollonia was besieged, and the enemy was in hopes, by undermining, to penetrate into the fortress unperceived; the spies communicated this intelligence to the Apollonians, who were dismayed, and, through fear, knew not how to act, because they were not aware at what time, nor in what precise spot, the enemy would make his appearance. Trypho, of Alexandria, who was the architect to the city, made several excavations within the wall, and, digging through, advanced an arrow’s flight beyond the walls.

267 In these excavations he suspended brazen vessels. In one of them, near the place where the enemy was forming his mine, the brazen vessels began to ring, from the blows of the mining tools which were working. From this he found the direction in which they were endeavouring to penetrate, and then prepared vessels of boiling water and pitch, human dung, and heated sand, for the purpose of pouring on their heads. In the night he bored a great many holes, through which he suddenly poured the mixture, and destroyed those of the enemy tliat were engaged in this operation. Similarly when Marseilles was besieged, and the enemy had made more than thirty mines ; the Marseillois suspecting it, lowered the depth of the ditch which encompassed the wall, so- that the apertures of all the mines were discovered. In those places, however, where there is not a ditch, they excavate a large space within the walls, of great length and breadth, opposite to the direction of the mine, which they fill with water from wells and from the sea; so that when the mouths of the mine open to the city, the water rushes in with great violence, and throws down the struts, overwhelming all those within it with the quantity of water introduced, and the falling in of the mine. When a rampart composed of the trunks of trees is raised opposite to a wall, it may be consumed by discharging red hot iron bars against it from the balistse. When, also, a tortoise is brought up to batter a wall with a ram, a rope with a noose in it may be lowered to lay hold of the ram, which being then raised by means of a wheel and axle above, keeps the head suspended, so that it cannot be worked against the wall: lastly, with burning arrows, and with discharges from the balistse, the whole machine may be destroyed. Thus all these cities are saved and preserve their freedom, not by machines, but by expedients which are suggested through the ready ingenuity of their architects. I have, in this book,

268 to tlie best of my ability, described the construction of those machines most useful in peace and war. In the preceding nine I treated of the other branches of Architecture, so that the whole subject is contained in ten books.

PLATES ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE ARCHITECTURE MARCUS VITRUYIUS ROLLICK BY JOSEPH GWILT.

TnTnHr; i /UJITIY 3UdHAM y-grbU

PLATE I.

272 PLATE I. / Eig. 1. Is a diagram of the winds, as enumerated in Cliapter III. Book I. 2 and 3. Are representations of ancient bricks, whereof Fig. 2. is that of the pentadoron and its half brick, and Fig. 3. that of the tetradoron and its half brick. See Chapter III. Book II. 4. Represents the different sorts of brick and stone walling, mentioned by the author in the third and eighth Chapters of the second Book. A. The reticulated work (reticulatum opus). B. The uncertain (incertum opus). C. The work called isodomum. D. The work called pseudisodomum. E. The work called Z/jarXeKTov ( emplectum). F. The Siarovoi  or bond stones.

PLATE II.

PLATE II. Fig. 1. The plan of a city, so set out as to afford shelter from the noxious winds. See Chapter VI. Book I. 2 and 3. Plan and elevation of a part of the walls. See Chapter Y. Book I., and Chapter II. Book VI. 4. Method of determining the meridian line. See Chapter VI. Book I.

PLATE III.

276 PLATE III. Eig. 1. Is the plan of a Temple in antis, a a are the antse. If in front of them, the columns b b b b be placed, it then becomes a prostyle temple. A. is the cell. B. the pronaos. C. the door. See Chapters I. and II. Book III. Eig. 2. Represents the plan of an amphiprostyle Temple, or one having columns in the rear as well as in the front. A. the cell. B. the pronaos. C. the posticus. D. the door. a a, antes. See Chapters I. and II. Book III. Eig. 3. The elevation of a diastyle tetrastylos Temple: that is, having intercolumniations of three diameters, with four columns in front. See Chapters I. and II. Book III. This elevation will answer to the plans above described, observing however, that antes must be substituted for the external columns, to make it correspond with the plan of Eig. 1. See Chapters I. and II. Book III.

PLATE IV.

PLATE IV. Fig. 1. Is tlie plan of a Temple, which the author says may he called pseudodipteral, as described in Chapter VII. Book IV. A. the cell. B. the pronaos. Fig. 2. Is the elevation of an hexastyle Temple with a systyle intercolumniation, monotryglyphal, that is having only one triglyph in the frieze over an intercolumniation. This will suit the plan exhibited in Fig. 1. See Chapter III. Book IV.

PLATE Y.

f 280 PLATE Y. Pig. 1. The plan of a peripteral temple. The wings, or passages between the walls of the cells and the columns in flank, are the origin of the name it bears. This temple is hexastyle, or w 7 ith six columns in front, having eustyle intercolumniations, that is of two diameters and a quarter. A. the cell. B. the pronaos. 2. Elevation to double size of the plan above described, of the Ionic order. a a a acroteria. See Chapters I. II. and III. Book III.

m PLATE YI.

282 PLATE VI. Fig. 1 . Is the plan of a dipteral temple, so called from the double passages between the columns on the flanks lettered AAAA. See Chapters I. and II., Book III. H.  Plan of a pseudodipteral or false dipteral temple. This presents in front and rear the appearance of a dipteral temple, but the passages AAAA of the former figure are herein reduced to a single passage B, one range of columns being omitted. See Chapters I. and II. Book III. 2.  Is an elevation which answers to either of the above mentioned plans: the arrangement of the intercolumniations is systyle and the number of columns makes it octastylos. See Chapters I. and II. Book III.

PLATE YII.

984 PLATE VII. Eig. 1. Is the plan of an hypsethral or open temple; the part A is the hypsethral, or uncovered part. 9. Is half of an elevation answering to the above- mentioned plan. The arrangement of the intercolumniations is picnostyle, and the number (ten) of the columns makes it deeastylos. 3. Is a half section of the temple through the centre transversely. Bee Chapters I. and II. Book III.

I ill PLATE VIII.

286 PLATE YIII. Fig*. 1. The Doric Order. Chapter III. Book IV. A. A. The Column, with twenty flutes. B. The Capital. C. The Architrave, or Epistylium. D. The Frieze. E. The Cornice. F. A Metopa. G. A Triglyph. H. Capital of a Triglyph. Fig. 2. The Ionic Order. Chapter III. Book III. A. A. The Column. B. The Base. C. The Capital. D. The Architrave. E. The Frieze. F. The Cornice. G. Lower Fascia. H. Middle Fascia. I. Upper Fascia. K. Side elevation of Capital. L. L. Dentels. M. Capital to a larger scale. Fig. 6. Corinthian Order. Chapter I. Book IV, The plan of the Corinthian Capital. Fig. 4. The Elevation of the same.

PLATE IX.

PLATE IX. Fig. 1. and 2. Exhibit the parts of a Roof in section and elevation as described in Chapter II. Book IV. a a. Beams (Trabes). b b. Ridge piece (Colnmen). c. King post (Columna). d d d. Tye beam (Transtrum). e. Strut (Capreolus). f f. Rafters (Cantherii). g g g g. Purlines (Templa). h h. Common Rafters (Asseres). The above letters refer to both Figures 1. and 2. On the right hand part of the latter Figure the tiles are shown. Fig. 3. and 4. Are doors with their ornaments (Ante- pagmenta). Chapter VI. Book IV. Fig. 5. The Tuscan Order. See Chapter VII. Book IV.

PLATE X.

290 PLATE X. Fig. 1. Is a plan of a Tuscan Temple. Chapter VII. Book IV. The side A shows it in antis, the side B shows it prostylos. C. is the larger, and DD. the smaller cells. Fig. 2. Represents the elevation of the preceding Figure. The arrangement of the intercolum- niations is Arseostylos. Fig. 3. Is a plan of a Monopteral Temple, see Chapter VII. Book IV. Fig. 4. An elevation of the preceding Figure. A. The Stylobata or Pedestal. B. The Flower (Flos). C. The Dome (Tholus). Fig. 5. Plan of half a Peripteral round temple. A. The Cell. Fig. 6. An elevation of the preceding Figure. B. The Stylohata. C. The Tholus. D. The Flower.

PLATE XI,

292 PLATE XI. The plan of the Theatre at Pola, founded on the restoration by Serlio in his work on Architecture.— Venice, 1567. It nearly corresponds in its detail with the directions given in Book V. Chapter VI.

PLATE XII.

294 PLATE XII. Section of the Theatre whose plan is given in the foregoing plate ; is also founded on the restoration of it by Serlio, from parts existing at the period he wrote.

PLATE XIII.

PLATE XIII. Plan of the Theatre of Herodes Atticns, excavated on the side of the rock of the Acropolis at Athens. It corresponds in some respects with the directions given for the plan of the Greek Theatre in Book V. Chapter VIII.

INDEX. A. Abacus,  page 74, 83, 95. Abaton, 50. Abderites, 167. Abutments, 148. Acanthus, in the Corinthian capital, 82. Accius, the poet, 206. Achaia, 42, 81. ’AKpofiaTocoQ,  231. Acids, -wonderful nature of, 190, et seq. Acroteria, 77—Represented, 280. Actors, comic and tragic, 115. Adjustment, 63. Adriatic Sea, 42, 56, 57. iEolipile, 21. iEqui, in Italy, 191. iEschylus, 154. iEsculapius, 12, 155. iEthiops of the south, 183.— Lake of ^Ethiopia, 187. iEtna, 41. Africa, prolific of wild beasts, 192.—African plains, 184. Africus, 22. Agatharchus, 154. Agesistratus, 155. Agetor, of Byzantium, 262. Aisles, or wings, of courts, 136. Alabandines, 167. Albanse, stone quarries of, 43. Albula, river, 185. Alder, 180. Alexander, 29, et seq. 151, 190. Alexandria, 30, 152, 153, 174, 207, 220. Alexis, the comedian, 128. Alps, 56, 58, 183, 190. Altanus, 24. Altars of the Gods, how to be placed, 92, 98. Altinum, 17. Amalgamation, 170, 171. 'A/xa^oTTodsQ,  260. Amiternine stone quarries, 43. Ammon, 187. Amphiprostylos, 66. — Plan of an amphiprostyle temple, 276. ’AfMpipevcng,  a machine, 235. Amphitheatre, 27. Amphorae (cullearia), 143. Analemma, 207; on the construction of dials by the, 220; formation of the, 223. Anaporicum, a winter dial, 225. Anatona, capitals, 253. Anaxagoras Clazomenius, 151, 154, 177, 219. Ancona, 57. Ancones (trusses), or prothy- rides, 94. Andrias, 223. Andrones, 146. Andronicus Cyrrhestes, 22. Angle-tiles, 159. Angles, 66; of a portico, 122. Anician stone quarries, 43. Anisocyclon, an engine, 231. Antes in buildings, 66, 145, 147; represented, 276. ’Avrr/xovvTSQ,  places that resound, 116. Anterides, counter-forts, 148. Anthrax, 170. Antibasis, 253, 256. Antiboreus, a dial, 223. Antimachides, anAthenian architect, 155. Antiochus, king, 155. Antipater, 190, 219. Antistates, 155. Antithalamus, 145. Apollonia, 187, 266. Apollonians, 266. Apollonius, 9, 223. Apulia, 17.

Apaturius of Alabanda, 167, et seq. Apelles, the painter, 7. Apennine mountains, 42.—Described, 58. Apollo, colossal, of Ephesus, 238. —Of Delos, 206.—Of Delphi, 80.- Games dedicated to Apollo and the Muses, by Ptolemy, at Alexandria, 152.—Temple of, at Miletus, 156. Apophygis,a contraction of thickness, 95. Apothesis, 83. Aqueduct, 197. Aquileia, 17. Aquitaine, 33. Arabia, Numidian, 187, 189. Arachne, a dial, 223. Aradus, 264. Arseostylos, 68, 70, 290. Aratus, 219. Arcadia, 190. Arched Channels, 196. Arches, 148. Archimedes, 6, 9, 155, 205. Architecture, defined, 3.— On what it depends, 9.—Of its different branches, 13. Architrave, 93, 114. Archytas, 9, 155, 205.—Arcs or rods, iron (uncini ferrei), 120. Ardea, fountains of, 185. Area, 21, 26, 63, 72, 202. Area, of a city, disposition and situation of buildings within it, 21. Areopagus, 34. Arevanias, 48. Arezzo, 47. Argelius, 155. Argos, 48, 80, 191. Ariobarzanes, 117. Aristarchus, of Samos, 7, 8,213, 223. Aristides, 193. Aristippus, the Soeratic philosopher, 127. Aristomenes of Thasos, the painter, 62. Aristophanes, the comic poet, 128.—The grammarian, 152. Aristotle, 151, 202. Aristoxenes, the musician, 7, 107, 111. Arms of Catapults, 6, 252. Arrangement, 9.—In Doric proportions, 88. Arrises, of Fillets, 78. Arsenal, 123, 154. Arsinoe, 81. Artemisia, 49, et seq, Artemo, 236. Artist, or workman, 149. Arts, relative to attacks, 19,258. Ascent, 72, 96, 112. Asia, 38, 42. Asphaltic pool, 187. ’A(nr\r]vog,  herb, 17. Astabora, river, 183. Astasoba, river, ib. Astragal, 74, 93. Astrologers, 112, 219. Astronomy, 7. Athos, Mount, 30. Athenians, 80, 128. Athens, 22, 34, 47, 67, 97, 117, 156, 169, 186, 207, 220. ’A rXavreg, 147. Atlas, 183. Atoms, 36. Attack, machines for, 258. Attalus, 81.—Attalic Kings, 47, 152. Attic, honey, 57; attic work, to drriKovpysg,  73, 92, 94. Auger (terebra), 259. Augustus, temple of, 103. M. Aurelius, 2. Auriga, a celestial sign, 216. Avptov,  25. Auster, 22. Automata, 224. Aventine, Mount, 171. Axis, 84, 208. 225,236, 238. Axle, 239. Axles, 232. Axon, 221. B. Babylon,  walls of, 20, 187. Bacchus, temples of, 11, 27, 69, 87, 117, 155. Bake, 40.—Baian Mountains, 41.

299 Balearic Isles, 169, 193. Balista, 6, 254, 255, 257. B avavaog,  a machine for draught, 231. Bands, of pillows, 75. Bankers’ shops, 101, et seq. Bars (fusi), 238. Bars and levers, 246. Base (lysis), 114. Base (subjectio), of the catapult, 253. Bases, of columns, 72. Basilica, 101. Basin, 180. Basin (catinum), 180. Basis, base, 81, 238, 247, 260. Baths, their arrangement and parts, 120, 143. Bear, Great and Little, constellations, 217. Beams (trahes), 84; lintel beams, 137; well-wrought beams, 113, 258, 260, 267; small beams, 262; see representation, 288. Beams (tigna), 84, 231, 233, 258, 262. Beater (bacillus), 39. Beaters, 158, 200. Beauty in building, bow produced, 13. Bed-chambers, 145. Bedas,ofByzantium, statuary,62. Beds, of beams (columbaria), 85; of beams and rafters, 85; of stones, 45. Berosus,the Chaldean, 212, 219, 223. Bitumen, 20, 41, 187. Black (atramentum), 165, 173. Black, colour (coracinus), 189. Block (trochlea), 233. Blocks, of stone, 237. Blue, colour, 174. Blue-eyed People, 131. Body, of the roof, 136. Boeotia, 189. Bond (coagmentum), 38, 45, 91, 188. Bondstones, diarovo t, 46; represented, 272. Borysthenes, 183. Bossed nails (clavi muscarii), 163. Box,247; small,249; dove-tailed, 252; of the drum-wheel, 249. Braces, capreoli, 253. Braces, in the tortoise, 261. Brass, Corinthian, 194. Brass barrels, with moveable bottoms, 247. Brass Coin, 65. Brass Founders, 44. Bressummers (trabes), 84. Brick, eight inch (bessalis), 120. Brick, walls, 47; burnt-bricks in buildings, walls, &c. 51, 158. Bricks, 36; of baked earth, 187; representations of ancient bricks, 272. Bryaxes, 155. Buccuke, in catapults, 252. Buckets, 243, 246. Builders, who the earliest, 34. Building, 13; origin and progress of, 31; of walls, 18, 45, 72, 140, 147; in water, 124. Buildings: on their situation according to the nature of different places, 130; of the proportions of private buildings, to suit the nature of their sites, 134 ; aspects proper for the different sorts of buildings, 140; forms of houses suited to the different ranks of persons, ib.; proportions of houses in the country, 142; arrangement and parts of Grecian houses, 145; on the strength of buildings, 147. Bulrush, 180. Burnt Brick, course of, on a wall, 51. Byzantium, 258. C. Cadiz, 258. Csecuhan Wine, 189. Caius Julius, son of -Masinissa, 193. Caius Mutius, 156. Caldron, in baths, 120. Gale dies (cisia), 232. Calentum, 38.

300 Callseschrus, an Athenian architect, 155. Callias, an architect of Khodes, 264, et seq. Callimachus, an architect named Catatechnos, 82. Callippus, an astrologer, 219. Camillum, 252. Camcenae, 184. Campania, 42, et seq., 58, 189, 190. Candelabra in houses, 166. Canon in hydraulics, Kav&v fiov- aiKog,  247. Canopus, constellation, 219. Capital, of a column, 75, 87; Corinthian, 82, et seq.; Ionic, 80 ; in machines, 254; Cata- tonum, 253. Capitol, 34, 69. Cappadocia, 188. Capstan, 235. Carbunculus, a kind of sand, 42. Carchesia, or tracheli, in the catapult, 253. Cardinales scapi, 94. Caria, 47, 61, 81. Carians, 48, 81. Carpion, 154. Carthage, 187. Carthaginians, 258. Carya, 4. Caryatides, ib. Casium, 187. Castor, temple of, 97. Catapult, on the, 6,251, 254,255, 257. Cataracts of the Nile, 183. Catatonum, capital, 253. Catheti, vertical lines, KaQsrog ypappij,  74. Caucasus, Mount, 183. Caulicoli (stalks), in capitals, 83, 166. Caurus, wind, 22. Causis, a mode of painting, 172. Cavetto, upper and lower, 74. Cavities, in a theatre, 109. Ceilings, 160, 138. Cell, in temples, 66 et seq., 91 et seq., 95 et seq. Cellar, wine, 14, 143; oil, ib. Cement, 12, 20, 39, 42, 45; of flint, 200 ; marble, 168. Centre, 64, 154, 222. Cephisus, river, 189. Ceres, temples of, 27, 68, 156. Cerostrata (doors inlaid), 94. Cetras, of Chalcedon, 258. Chserseas, 258. Chalcidica, 102. Chaldeans, 212, 219. Chalk, SeHnusian, 176 ; green, 169. Chambers (cubicula), 11, 140. Channel, crrpi^,  159, 164, 196, 252, 260; in Ionic columns, 75; in the catapult, 252. Channels (columbaria), 243. Charidas, 155. Chariot-body, 249. Cheek, of the chest, in the balista, 256. Cheeks (chelonia), 236, 239. Chelo, or manucla, 252. Chelonium, or pillow, 233, et seq. 236, 253. Xr/Xog,  in the balista, 256. Chest, 247, 256. Chion, a Corinthian statuary, 62. Chionides, the comic poet, 128. Chios, 81, 153, 266; fountain of, 191. Chips, of marble (assulte), 168. Choice, of salubrious places, 14 ; of places for the common use of the city, 26. Chorobates, in levelling, 195. Chorus, in theatres, 117. Xpwpa, 107. Chromatic modulation, 107,108. Chrysocolla, 168, 172. Cicero, 207. Cilbian Fields, of the Ephesians, 170. Cilicia, 187, et seq. Circle, 23. Circular application of motion, kvkXoci] Kivrjcng , 231, circular walk, ciavXog,  122. Circumstance (statio, Bepariff- p,og),  adds to the beauty of a work, 10; of the Greeks, 50.

301 Circus, Flaminius, 97; Maximus, 69. Cistern, 196. City, choice of situation for a, 14; foundations of walls and towers, 18; distribution and situation of buildings within the walls, 21; choice of situations for public buildings, 26; plans relative to these Subjects, 274. Clazomenae, 81; fields of the Clazomenians, 189. Cleombrotus, 5. Cliades, 155. Climacis in the balista, 256. Climate, dial of Berosus adapted to, 223. Clitorium, fountain of, 191. Clod, or mass, of lime, marble, &c., 159, 168, 170. Cn. Cornelius, 2. Coat in stucco, 161. Coating, 161. Coats of Punic wax, 172; of lime or sand, 158. Coelia, icoiXia,  in aqueducts, 198. Coslus, temple of, 10. Colchis, 183; buildings of the Colchi, 33. Cold Bath, lutrum, 122. Collars, in water engines, 247. Collina porta, 66. ColliquiiB (valleys), 135. Coloe, marsh, 183. Colony, Julian, of Fano, 102. Colophon, 81. Colossus of Halicarnassus, 47. Colours, in stucco, 162 ; natural, 169; vermilion and quicksilver, 170 ; preparation of vermilion, 171; artificial, 173; black, ib ; blue, and burnt yellow, 174; white lead, ver- digrease, and red lead, 174; purple, 175; factitious, 176. Columella (small column), of the catapult, 252. Columen (ridge-piece), 84. See Plate, 288. Columns, 72 ; origin of the three sorts of, 80; Corinthian, ib. 82 ; Doric proportions, 86 ; Tuscan, 95 ; Ionic, 63, 68, 72 ; their ornaments, how adapted to the sight, 77. Comic Poets, Greek, 100, 128. Compass (amussium), 23. Compluvium, 135. Compression, in hydraulics, 199, 224, 246. Concameratio (vaulting), 121, 147. Cone, a dial, 223. Conisterium, in the Palaestra, 122 . Consistency, 11. Consonances, natural, vviMhuviai, 109. Constellations, northern, 216 ; southern, 218. Copper, cyprian, 174. Cord, of the Spanish broom, 161, Coriceum, in the Palaestra, 122. Corinthian Virgin, 82 ; columns, 80 ; oeci, 138 ; theatres, 111 ; vessel, 194; order, 80; plate relative to, 286. Cornetan Division, in the Falis- can territory, 1U0. Cornices, 92, 103, 161. Corona, 57, 77, et seq. 89. et seq. 93. Coras, wind, 22. Cos, isle and city, 219. Cossutius, a Roman architect, 156. et seq. Cottian Alps, 190. Counterforts, anterides, 148. Counterpoise, 205, 225. Country, house in the, 142. Coupling, of beams, 95. Courts (cavaedia), 135; distributed into five species, ib. Courts (atria), 136. Courts, (cortes), in country houses, 142. Cover, in the machine of Ctesi- bius, 237. Crane, revolving (carchesia), 264. Crane, or grappling-hook (grus), 259. Crathis, river, 189.

Crete, isle of, 17, 56. Creusa, 81. Criodoche, a machine, icpiodoxv, 259. Crocodiles, 184. Croesus, 151; house of, 47. Cross-front, 256. Cross-pieces, 163, 195, 231, 258, 260. Crossing, of laths, 51. Crowning members (fastigia), 77. Crypts, in temples, 141. Ctesibius, 6, 155, 223, et seq. his machine, 246. Ctesiphon, of Gnosus, 67, 154, 156; machine of Ctesiphon, 237. Cubit, the" fourth part of the height of the body, 64. Cullearia, 143. Cumae, 124; Cuman Mountains, 41. Curiae, 104. Cutilium, 186. Cybctelus, 187. Cychn, in Thrace, 190. Cyclades, 169. Cydnus, a river of Cilicia, 187. Cymatium, 73, 80, 87. Cynosura, kvvog ovpa,  217. Cyrene, 189. Cyziceni, oeci, 139; triclinia, 145. D. Dams, 124. Daphnis, of Miletus, architect, 156. Darius, 151. Decastylos, 67; represented, 284. Decoration, in theatres, 113 ; on polished stucco, 164. Defence, machines for, 264. Defences (munitio), of a city, 19, 56, 264. Delphi, 154; Delphic Apollo, 61, 81. Demetrius Phalereus, 156. Demetrius Poliorcetes, 264,265. Democles, 155. Democritus, of Ahdera, 36, 151, 154, 201, 206, 219, et seq. Demophilus, 155. . Dentilled, cornice, 11. Dentils, 11, 76, 85. Diades, 258, 259. Diagonal, line, 83, 136, 203. Diagram, 107. Diagrams, 127. Dialling, a part of architecture, 13 ; on the construction of dials, 207, 220 ; of various dials and their inventors, 223. Diameter, 113, 221, 249. Diana, temples of, 11, 67, 81, 97, 154, 156, 237, 238; statue of, in cedar, 55. Diapason, 109. Diapente, 109. Diastylos, 68, 70; elevation of a diastyle tetrastylos temple, 276. Diatessaron, 109. AiaOeaig,  arrangement, 9. A idQvpov,  146. Diatonic, modulation, 107. A larovoi,  or bond-stones, 46; representation of, 272. A iavXog,  122. Didoron, StSwpov,  a kind of brick, 37. Diesis, in music, 107. DiezeugmenonAt£^EuyjaIvov, 108 . Digit, a measure, 65. Dimension (quantitas), 9 Diminution of columns, 70, 93. A ijxoipog ( two-thirds), 65. Dinocrates, architect of Alexander the Great, 29. Diognetus, of Rhodes, architect, 264, et seq. Diomedes, founder of Salpise, 17. Dionysodorus, 223. Dioptra, 195. Anrr)xaiicr),  in ships, 10. Diphilus, the architect, 155. AiirXaaiiuv,  65. Diplinthius (two bricks), 50. Dipteros, 67 ; dipteral arrangement, 158 ; plan of a dipteral temple, 282. Direction, by rule and square, 160.

303 Discus, on a plane, 223. Disdiapason, 109. Disorders, obstinate, in exposed situations, 21. Displuviatum, 135. Dissonant places, Karqxovvreg, 116. Distance, of planets from the sun, 213. Distribution, 9, 11, 45, 87, 166. Distribution and situation of buildings within the walls, 21. Divisions, of a city, 24. Dolphin, in hydraulics, 247. Dome (tholus), 167. See Plate, 290. Doors, of temples, 92 ; of two folds (bifora), 92. Doorways, of temples, 92, 137. Doric proportion and column, 11, 80, 86. Plate relative to, 286. Doron, dwpov,  a palm, 37. Dorus, king of Achaia and Peloponnesus, 80. Dove-tail, 96, 256; dove-tailed box, 252. Dowels, dove-tailed, 96,237,244. Draught, machines of, 15, 233. (See Machines.) Dressing (antepagmentum), 92, et seq. Drum-wheel, 235, 244, 249; toothed, 224, 244. Dyris, river, 183. Dyrrhachium, 187. E. Earth,  circuit of, 24; proportion of, in various trees, 54; altars to the, 98; pressure of, in foundations, 148. Eaves, 57, 135, 167, 259. 'H^aa, 6, 109. Echinus, in capitals of columns, 87, 95. Economy, 12. "EKK\r}0oyy oi, 108, 109. Phyros, 155. Physicians, 17. Physics, 35. QvaioXoyia,  5. Phyteus, 155. Piacenza, 207. Picenum, 43. Pictures, cut from walls, 47. Pictures, large, 164, 165. Piers, in buildings, 120, 148, et seq. Piers in harbours, 124. Pile, driving, 72, 234. Piling, 55. Pillars, for marking time, 224. Pillow, in a capital, 74; in the catapult, 253. Pillowed (Ionic) capital, 74, 103. Pin (fibula), 233, 234. Pinacotheca, 138. llival,  248.

310 Pinna, 186. Pinning, of beams, 234. Pipes (fistulse), in hydraulics, 96, 136, 246. Pipes (tubuli), 197. Piraeus, harbour, 154, 186. Pisistratus, 155. Piston-rods (ancones), 248. Pistons, 246. Pitane, a city of Asia, 38. Pivots (chodaces), 137. Pixodaurus, called Evangelus for having discovered a quarry of marble, 238. Places, salubrious, choice of, 14; places for the common use of a city, 26. Plan of a city, should be polygonal, 19. Planets, 207. Planking, 261. Plaster-work, 39,200, et seq. Plastering (tectorium opus), 37, 47, 120, 168 ; preparation of marble for, 168. Plastering (albarium opus), 104, 121 . Plato, 64, 151, 201. Pleuritides, rules in hydraulics, 248. Plinthium, a dial, 223. Plinths, 56, 68, 72; in the column, 69, 73, 95. Pneumatic machine, 231. Pneumaticos, 231.—Pneumatics, 223 Po, river, 56, 57, 183. Podium, in a theatre, 113; around a temple, 73, 165. Pole, in a gnomon, 208 Poles, 131. Polishing, of pavements, 158. Polishing, of plastering, 160, 163, 164, 169, 171. Pollis, his precepts on symmetry, 155. Polycles of Adramyttium, the painter, 62. Polycletus, the sculptor, ib. Polygonal towers, 19. Polyidus, 155; of Thessaly, temp. Philip of Macedon, 258. Polyspaston, a machine, 236. Pontine maithes, 17. Pontus, 33, 130, 169,175,183, 188. Pores, 179,199. Porinus, an Athenian architect, 155. Portable dials, 223. Porter’s rooms, 145. Portico, of Eumenes, 117; of Pompey, ib.; double portico, 122; portico on three sides, 145; portico behind the scenes, 117 ; in baths 122, 123. Portugal, 33. Posidonius, 193. Ilofforjje, dimension, 9. Posticum, rear of the temple, 67, 74. Posts, 148. Pothereus, 17. Potsherds, coat of, 164. Pozzolana, 40, et seq. Preecinctiones, passages, in theatres, 105. Praxiteles, 155. Press, 143, 242. Press-room, 143. Pressure, in mechanics, 240. Priene, a city of Asia, 7, 81, 154. Principles, la,  to be considered in the choice of situations, 15, 35. Prison, on the, 104. Proetus, daughters of, 191. Proconnesian marble, 47, 239. Projection, 51, 73; of roofs, 84. Projections (crepidines), 69, 93, 124. Projecture, 93. Promontories, 123. Promontory, of Minerva, ib. Pronaos, 74, 90, 95. Propigneum, 122. Proportion, 13, 63. Proportional instrument, of Eratosthenes, 206. Props, 23. Proscenium, 112. Proserpine, temples of, 11,156.

311 Proslambanomenos, in music, 108. Prospanclima, Trpdg irav tcXipa, a dial, 223. Prostahistoroumena, irpbg to. lo- Topiojitva,  a dial, 223. II poarag, 145. Prostylos, 66. Prothyrides (trusses), 94. Prothyrum, 146. Protyran wine, 189. Pseudisodomum, work so called in walling, 46; representation of, 272. Pseudodipteros, 66, 70. Pseudoperipteral temple, 97 ; plans of, 278, 282. Pteregoma (wing), 256 Pteroma 7TTSpwp,a, 90, 97. Ptolemy, king, 152, 153. Pulley, 223, passim,  233, 235, 236, 239. Pulpitum, XoyeXov,  in a theatre, 112,115. Pumice-stone, Pompeian, 41. Purlines (templa), 84. See Plate, 288. Purple, 175 ; colours, how prepared, 176. Puzzuoh, 174. Pycnostylos, 70, et seq.; represented, 284. Pythagoras, of Samos, 100, 177, 201, 203, 219, 245. Pythagoreans, discipline of the, 36. Pythian games, 201. Pythius, of Priene, architect, 7, et seq., 86. Q. Quadragenakia,  pipes, 197. Quadrant, 75. Quartile, 8. Quicksilver, 170. Quinaria, pipes of five digits, 197. Quinquagenaria, pipes, ib. Quirinus, temple of, 67, 172. Quiver, a dial, 223. E. Barters (cantherii), 84,102. See Plate, 288. Eafters (asseres), 84. See Plate, 288. Rails in doors, 94. Rain water, 182. Rammer, for loose earth, 157, 165. Ramparts, construction of, 20. Ravenna, 17, 55, 57 Receptacle of waters, 197. Recession of objects in painting, 154. Rechamus, 233. Red lead, 169, 174. Reeds,indicate water, 180; Grecian reeds, 160. Reflection from polished walls, 163. Reservoir, 197, 226, 246. Resonant places, 116. Reticulated work, in walling, 45; represented, 272. Reverberation, 106. Rhine, 183. Rhodes, 49, 127, 175, 220, 264. Rhodian portico, 145. Rhodians, 174, 264, et seq.; their fleet, 49. Rhone, 183. Ribs (asseres), 160. Ridge-piece, columen, 84. Right angled triangle, method of constructing, 203. Right line, 4. Rivers, the greatest, flow from the north, 183. Roads leading to gates, 19. Rod, iron, (arcus ferreus), 120. Roller, or cylinder, 237, 259. Rome, praise of, 50, et seq., 133. Romulus, house of, 34.

312 Roofs, 84, 96; parts of a roof, represented in section and elevation, 288. Rooms, 138,144,160, 162, 163. Eopes, in machines of draught, 234. Rules, in hydraulics, 284. S. Sagging, 148. Salapia, town of, 17. Salmacis, fountain of, 48. Sa^jSu/c?;, 131, 266. Samos, 81, 154. Sand, 38, 39, 161 ; strong, common, and red, 179; counterpoise of, 225. Sand-coat, in stucco, 161. Sand-pit, 38, 41. Sand-stone, 41, 43. Sapinea, 54. Sardians, 47. Samacus, 155. Saturn, planet, 210. Satyrus, 155. Sawing into four quarters, 54. Scale-beam, 240. Scaling machine, 259. Scamilli (impares), 73, 118. Scansoria, 231. Scaphe, a dial, 223. Scarlet-dye, 175. Scene. See Theatre. Scene painting, 115. Scenography, 10. Schemata, 25. Schola, in a hath, 121. Scopas, 155, 223. _ Scorpion, a machine, 6, 19, 231, 251. Scotia, in columns, 73, 89. Screw-press, 143. Screw-pump (cochlea), 244. Sculpture, 7; of the cymatium, 93. Scutula, sight-hole, 255. Sea, superior and inferior, 58. -altar of the, 98. Seasons, changes of the, 220. Semicircular dial, 223. Semicylinder, 206. Semiramis, 187. Semimetopse, 88. Semitone, 107. Septentrio, 22. Septimius, P. 155. Serapis, temple of, 27. Sesquialterum, 65. Sestertium, 65. Settling of timber, 157. Sewage, 6, 119. Sewers, 119. Shaft, of a column, 69 ; of the climacis in the balista, 204; in staircases, 204; of the water-screw, 245. Shafts (scapi), in machines, 237. Sheepcotes, 143. Shield (clypeus), in the Laconi- cum, 121. Sicilicus, 256. Sicily, 187, 189. Side-pieces, 261. Side-posts (parastatse), 252. Sight-hole, in the balista, 254. Signs, of the zodiac, sun’s course through, 214. Silanion, 155. Silenus, 154. Silver, method of detecting,when mixed with gold, 204. Silver-mines of Athens, 169. Simse (epitithides), in the coronas, 77. Singing birds, in hydraulics, 246. Sinkings, in the soffit of the corona, 89. Sinope, 169. Six, deemed a perfect number, 65. 2 KiaOripag,  23, 220. Slabs, in pavement, 158. Smyrna, 154, 169; city of, 81, 117. Socket-pieces, chelonia, 233. Socrates, 61, 62, 151. Soffit, of the corona, 89. Soloe, a town of Sicily, 187. Soracte, stone quarries of, 43. Sound work (catenatio), 54. Spain 33, 130, 169, 172.

318 Sparta, 47. Spectacula, in theatres, the places for the audience, 104, 113. Spheroidal surface, 195. Springs, 18G; supply of water from, 190. Spur, 256. Square (ancones, normre), pro- thyrides, 202; stone, 43, 45, 80; rule and square, 161; method of doubling the area of the square, 203. Square, quadratum, 87. Stadia, covered, 123. Staircases, in a theatre, 112; method of setting out the steps, 204. Stalks (caulieoli), in capitals, 83, 166. Stalks, of plants, represented on walls, 166. Stand-pipes (columnaria), in aqueducts, 198. Stars, rising and setting of, 220. Statonia, prefecture of, 44. Statuaries, distinguished, 63. Steelyard (statera), 240, 258. Steps, 73, 105; lower, of staircases, 204. Stereobata, stylobata, 72. Stocks, brazen, 257. SroixEia, 15. Stone-quarries, 43; discovered at Ephesus, 238. Stopples, 226, 247. Store-rooms, apothecse, 141. Strategeum, 117. Straw, its use, 36, 261. Streets, 21. Strength, in building, whence arising, 13. String, 161. Srpig, of the catapult, 252. Struts (capreoli), 84. See Plate, 288. Stucco, 159, 160, 163, 168, 173. Stylobata, 72. See Plate, 290.. Styx, water of, 190. Sudatories, in baths, 121. Summer-rooms, 161, 165. Sun, temple of the, 10; course of the sun through the twelve signs, 214. Sunium, 97. Sunk, in the centre (alveolatus), 73. Susa, 192. Swelling, in the middle of columns (entasis), 71. Syene, 184. Symmetry, 9, 13, 63, 66, 129, 134. 2v[j,T

PI. 3. 4i#iiii!l||iii!!ii!p!PiiBri: , : -i. Fig. 3. London :Lockwood &C-°, 7 Stationers Hall Court,LudgateHill.

t 1

II. 4-. Fig'. 2. ■iS-Mod. Fig'.l london:Lockwood & C°, 7 Stationers Hall Court,I-udgate Hill.

c. r- t&r&j

PI. 5. lira:; 'iljij Pondofi.'ljockwood Sc C?,  7 Stationers Hall Court,Ludgate Hill■

PL 6 . SpisSii \ L it'  J {) IpR: 'J'S' London:Lockwood ScC°., 7 Stationers Hall Court, Ludgate Hill

mm MC»4i£»ldi i'C^ss,

Kg’. 2 . Kg. 3. Fig 1 London:Lockwood & Cl, 7 Stationers Hall Court,Ludgate Hill

i.l- Modu L 1 87 Dijuit'rers London :Lockwood Sr('°,  7 Stationers Hall Court,LudgateHill .

mrm

i London . Lockwood ScC°,j Stationers Hall Court, lendgate lli.U

London f.ockwood ,7 Stationers Hall Court, Lud^vte Hilt

77 . London ■ .Lockwood & C°, ^ Stationers Hall Court, Lud^gate HiV

FI,tin 1Z Sr. Miii. i i immini ... ,11 [Miii:ii' | ilii.|i!ii|'|iiii'|ii jii! liUDQL jrucmiilllulti ' 1 London. Lockwood L C' 1 , 7  Stationers Hall Court, Zudgnte Hi l'tii:rni | i|7||j!(ii|i|.|in| ! jjini|||||ij||i!iii!ii(j' , i nUlIillllllllll! ||» ;! CT}t i iijiiiiimi lllilllllllll! . 1111 I r : :i! iiiiimnimiiii hi mu : lllll . " ■* ■iiibiii'iiiiii’imwAii: i' '■ i! | ''Miiiiniiiiiiii:iii i :. i: ii i i ;:iiiii[niii,n]!imniimii ,|l|j i -"|| l ; llllllll ll lll II liiiiijiniiijiiniM ~ , TifTTarirTii m iiiiiiiiiiiii iii niiriiiiiiniimniim ii pijHiiinjinji B lihi'iffisi'T i i ilniiiiiiiiir.' i ii i iiiiiiiiiila.

Plate I'd, London:Lockwood & C° ,7 Stationers Halt Court, LudgateHill

Crosby Lockwood & Sow ARCHITECTURE, BUILD [ ING, DECORATIVE ARTS| CARPENTRY, TIMBER SANITATION, ETC. | A Complete Catalogue of New and Standard Works on MECHANICAL, CIVIL, MARINE and ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING; MINING, METALLURGY and COLLIERY WORKING ; TRADES and MANUFACTURES, The INDUSTRIAL ARTS, CHEMICAL MANUFACTURES, COUNTING HOUSE WORKS, etc.; AGRICULTURE, FARMING, GARDENING; LAND and ESTATE AGENCY, VALUATION, Etc. Post Free on Application. LONDON : 7, STATIONERS’ HALL COURT, LUDGATE HILL, E.C., AND AT I2la, Victoria Street, Westminster, S.W. 1909 .

■ t ■■■•

LIST OF WORKS j ON ARCHITECTURE, BUILDING, | DECORATIVE ARTS, CARPENTRY, 1 TIMBER, SANITATION, Etc. ;i ACOUSTICS OP PUBLIC BUILDINGS: The Laws of Sound as applied to the Arrangement of Buildings. By Professor T. Roger Smith, F.R.I.B.A. New Edition, revised. With numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth . . . 1/6 ALPHABETS, ANCIENT & MEDIAEVAL ORNAMENTAL. From the Eighth Century, with Numerals; including Gothic, Church-Text, large and small, German, Italian, Arabesque, Initials for Illumination, Monograms, Crosses, &c., for the use of Architectural and Engineering Draughtsmen, Missal Painters, Masons, Decorative Painters, Lithographers, Engravers, Carvers, &c., &c. Collected and Engraved by F. Delamotte, and printed in Colours. New and Cheaper Edition. Royal 8vo, oblong, ornamental boards. 2/6 ALPHABETS, PLAIN AND ORNAMENTAL, MODERN. Including German, Old English, Saxon, Italic, Perspective, Greek, Hebrew, Court Hand Engrossing, Tuscan, Riband, Gothic, Rustic, and Arabesque : with several Original Designs, and an Analysis of the Roman and Old English Alphabets, large and small, and Numerals, for the use of Draughtsmen, Surveyors, Masons, Decorative Painters, Lithographers, Engravers, Carvers, &c. Collected and Engraved by F. Delamotte, and printed in Colours. New and Cheaper Edition. Royal 8vo, oblong, ornamental boards . 2/6 " There is comprised in it every possible shape into which the letters of the alphabet and numerals can be formed, and the talent which has been expended in the conception of the various plain and ornamental letters is wonderful."— Standard ALPHABETS AND INITIALS, MEDIAEVAL. By F. G. Delamotte. Containing 21  Plates and Illuminated Title, printed in Gold and Colours. With an Introduction by J. Willis Brooks. Fifth Edition. Small 4 to, ornamental boards. Net 5/0 ALPHABETS. See also Illuminating. ARCHES, PIERS, BUTTRESSES. By William Bland. Crown 8vo, cloth .... 1 /6

4 CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON’S CATALOGUE. ARCHITECTURE—ORDERS. The Orders and their ^Esthetic Principles. By W. H. Leeds. Crown 8vo. 1/6 ARCHITECTURE—STYLES. The History and Description of the Styles of Architecture of Various Countries, from the Earliest to the Present Period. By T. Talbot Bury, F.R.I.B.A., &c. Illustrated. Crown 8 vo, cloth. 2/0 “ Orders and Styles of Architecture,” in One Vol. . . .  3/6 ARCHITECTURE-DESIGN. The Principles of Design in Architecture, as deducible from Nature and exemplified in the Works of the Greek and Gothic Architects. By Edw. L. Garbett, Architect. Crown 8 vo, cloth.2/6 “We know no work that we would sooner recommend to an attentive reader desirous to- obtain clear views of the nature of architectural art. The book is a valuable one.”— Builder. *** The three preceding Works in One handsome Vol., half-bound, entitled “ Modern Architecture,” price 6 / 0 ' ARCHITECTURE OF MARCUS VITRUVIUS POLLIO. In Ten Books. Translated from the Latin by J. Gwilt. With 23  Plates. Crown 8 vo, cloth.5/0 ARCHITECTURE—GRECIAN. An Inquiryinto the Principles of Beauty in; with an Historical View of the Rise and Progress of the Art in Greece. By the Earl of Aberdeen. Crown 8 vo, cloth . .1/0 *** The two preceding Works in one handsome Volume, half-bound, entitled “Ancient Architecture,” price 6 / 0 - ARCHITECTURE, MECHANICS OF. A Treatise on , Applied Mechanics, especially Adapted to the Use of Architects. By E. W. Tarn, M.A., Author of “The Science of Building,” &c. Second Edition, Enlarged. Illustrated with 125 Diagrams. Crown 8 vo, cloth 7/6 "  The book is a very useful and helpful manual of architectural mechanics.”— Builder. ARCHITECT’S GUIDE: Being a Text-Book of Useful Information for Architects, Engineers, Surveyors, Contractors, Clerks of Works, &c. By F. Rogers. Crown 8 vo, cloth . 3/6 ARCHITECTURAL MODELLING IN PAPER. The Art of. By T. A. Richardson. Crown 8 vo, cloth . 1/6 “ A valuable aid to the practice of architectural modelling.”— Bttilder’s Weekly Reporter. ARCHITECTURAL PERSPECTIVE. The whole Course and Operations of the Draughtsman in Drawing a Large House in Linear Perspective. Illustrated by 43 Folding Plates. By F. O. Ferguson. Third Edition. 8vo, boards.3/6 “ It is the most intelligible of the treatises on this ill-treated subject that I have met with, E. ingress  BELL, ESQ., in the R.I.B.A. Journal.

ARCHITECTURE, BUILDING, DECORATIVE ARTS, &c.  5 ARCHITECTURAL PERSPECTIVE FOR BEGINNERS. For Students and Amateurs in Architecture, Painting, &c. By G. Pyne. | Crown 8v6, cloth. 2/0  , BRICKLAYING. General Principles of Practical Bricklaying ; . Arch Drawing, Cutting, Setting, and Pointing; Paving, Tiling, &c. By j Adam Hammond. With 68 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo, cloth . . 1 /6 |j BRICK=CUTTING AND SETTING. By Adam Hammond. With 90 Engravings. Crown 8vo, cloth . . . . . . 1/6 i[| I; BRICKWORK. Embodying the General and Higher Principles i| of Bricklaying, Cutting and Setting; with the Application of Geometry to Roof Tiling, &c. By F. Walker. Crown 8vo, cloth . . . 1 16 BRICKS AND TILES. Rudimentary Treatise on the Manufacture of. Containing an Outline of the Principles of Brickmaking. By E. Dobson, M.R.I.B.A. Additions by C. Tomlinson, F.R.S. Illustrated. Crown 8vo, cloth.* 3/0 “ The best handbook on the subject. We can recommend it as a good investment.”—Builder. BRICK AND TILE BOOK. Comprising Brick and Tile Making, by E. Dobson, M.Inst.C.E.; Practical Bricklaying by A. Hammond, Brick-Cutting and Setting, by A. Hammond. 550 pp., with 270 Illustrations, strongly half-bound. 6/0 BUILDER’S PRICES. See Lockwood’s “ Builder’s Price Book,” page 10. BUILDING, SCIENCE OF. An Elementary Treatise on the Principles of Construction. By E. Wyndham Tarn, M.A. Lond. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 3/6 BUILDING, ART OF. General Principles of Construction, Character, Strength, and Use of Materials, Preparation of Specifications and Estimates, &c. By Edward Dobson, M.Inst.C.E. Fifteenth Edition, revised by J. P. Allen, Lecturer on Building Construction at the Durham College of Science. Crown 8vo, cloth .... 2/0 BUILDING. A Book on Civil and Ecclesiastical Building. By Sir Edmund Beckett, Bart., LL.D. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 4/6 ; cloth boards, 5/6 “ A book which is always amusing and nearly always instructive.”— Times. BUILDING ESTATES. A Treatise on the Development, Sale, Purchase, and Management of Building Land. By F. Maitland. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth . . 2/0 “This book should undoubtedly be added to the library of every professional man dealing ■with building land .”—Land Agents' Record.

6 CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON’S CATALOGUE . BUILDING, COTTAGE. By C. Bruce Allen. Twelfth Edition, with Chapter on Economic Cottages for Allotments by E. E. Allen, C.E. Crown 8vo, cloth . 2/0 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION (PRACTICAL). A Handbook for Students Preparing for Examinations, and a Book of Reference for Persons Engaged in Building. By John Parnell Allen, P.A.S.I., Formerly Lecturer on Building Construction at the Armstrong College. of Science, Newcastle-on-Tyne. Fifth Edition, Revised and Enlarged. Medium 8vo, 596 pp., with over 1,300 Illustrations, cloth. [Just Published, Net 7/6 Bricks and their Composition—Brick Bond and its application—Brick Reveals and Arches—Damp and its Prevention—Building Stones—Stone Dressings—'Wood for Building Purposes—wood Floors—Partitions—Roofs—Iron and Steel—Rivets and Riveting—Iron Roofs—Coverings for Roofs—Fireproof Floors—Joints and mouldings in Joinery—Doors—Windows—Wooden Stairs— Skylights and Lanterns—plastering and Painting—Centring foundations, &c. —Stresses—Calculation of Strains—Sanitation—fireplaces—Weights and Strengths—Quantities and Prices, &c., and Appendices. “ The author depends nearly as much on his diagrams as on his type. The pages suggest the hand of a man of experience in building operations—and the volume must be a blessing to many teachers as well as to students.”— The Architect. “ The author may be congratulated on having reached his fifth edition of a work which contains all that is most needed for the study of these important branches of construction.”— The Times. BUILDING INSPECTION, ELEMENTARY MANUAL OF; or, How to Become a Building Inspector. By W11. R. Purchase, Building Inspector to the Borough of Hove, Author of “Practical Masonry.” 136 pp., With 9 Plates of Diagrams. Crown 8vo, cloth. [Just Published. Net 2/6 Duties and Qualifications of Building Inspectors to Municipal Councils —Memorandum of the Local Government Board as to Bye-laws with respect to New Streets, buildings, Drainage, &c.—Setting out a Building—Foundations in “Made-upground ’’—Excavators’ Memoranda, Foundations, &c.—Bricks —Stocks—Place—Chuffs—Burrs—Footings of a wall—Chimneys—Flues—Damp- proof Courses—Mortar —setting —Brick-work Memoranda — Cements —Retaining Walls—Stone Masonry-Terra-Cotta—Timber—floors—piles—Pillars —Roof Coverings—Plastering—Plasterers’ Memoranda—Drainage—Plan Book —appendix containing useful Memoranda for Building inspectors. CABINET-MAKER’S GUIDE TO THE ENTIRE CONSTRUCTION OP CABINET WORK. By Richard Bitmead. Illustrated with Plans, Sections and Working Drawings. Crown 8vo, cloth 2/6 CARPENTRY, PRINCIPLES OF. A Treatise on the Pressure and Equilibrium of Timber Framing, the Resistance of Timber, and the Construction of Floors, Arches, Bridges, Roofs, Uniting Iron and Stone with Timber, &c. To which is added an Essay on the Nature and Properties of Timber, &c., with Descriptions of the kinds of Wood used in Building; also numerous Tables of the Scantlings of Timber for different purposes, the Specific Gravities of Materials, &c. By Thomas Tredgold, C.E. With an Appendix of Specimens of Various Roofs of Iron and Stone, Illustrated. Seventh Edition, thoroughly Revised and considerably Enlarged by E._ Wyndham Tarn, . M.A., Author of “The Science of Building,” &c. With 6r Plates, Portrait of the Author, and several Woodcuts. In One large Vol., 4to, cloth.£1 5 S , “A work whose monumental excellence must commend It wherever skilful carpentry is concerned. The author's principles are rather confirmed than impaired by time. The additional plates are of great intrinsic value .”—Building News. CARPENTER’S GUIDE: or, Book of Lines for Carpenters; comprising all the Elementary Principles essential for acquiring a knowledge of Carpentry. Founded on the late Peter Nicholson’s standard work. A New Edition, Revised by Arthur Ashpitel, F.S.A. Together with Practical Rules on Drawing, by George Pyne. With 74 Plates, 4to, cloth £1 1 s,

ARCHITECTURE, BUILDING, DECORATIVE ARTS, &c. 7 CARPENTRY AND JOINERY. The Elementary Principles of Carpentry. Chiefly composed from the Standard Work of T. Tredgold. With Additions and a Treatise on Joinery by E. W. Tarn, M.A. Eighth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth . . 3/6 Atlas of 35 Plates to accompany and illustrate the foregoing book. With Descriptive Letterpress. 4to. 6/0 “ These two volumes form a complete treasury of carpentry and joinery and should be in the hands of every carpenter and joiner in the Empire.”— Iron. CIRCULAR WORK IN CARPENTRY AND JOINERY. A practical Treatise. By George Collins. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 2/6 “ Cheap in price, clear in definition, and practical in the examples selected.”— Builder. COLOURING, GRAMMAR OF. Applied to Decorative Painting and the Arts. By G. Field. New Edition, enlarged by E. A. Davidson. With Coloured Plates. Crown 8vo, cloth . 3/0 “ The book is the most useful rdsutnd  of the properties of pigments.”— Builder. COMPLETE MEASURER: Setting forth the Measurement of Boards, Glass, Timber, and Stone. By R. Horton. Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth .. 4/0 CONCRETE: ITS NATURE AND USES. A Book for Architects, Builders, Contractors, and Clerks of Works. By G. L. Sutcliffe, A.R.I.B.A. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 396 pp.. with Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth. Net 9/0 “ The manual fills a long-felt gap. It Is careful and exhaustive ; equally useful as a student’s guide and an architect’s book of reference ."—-Journal c/the Royal Institute of British Architects . CONCRETE, REINFORCED. Seepage 13. DECORATION (ELEMENTARY). As applied to Dwelling- Houses, &c. An Elementary Treatise. By J. W. Facey. Cr. 8vo, cloth 2/0 “The principles which ought to guide the decoration of dwelling-houses are clearly set forth, and elucidated by examples; while full instructions are given to the learner.”— Scotsman. DECORATION (PRACTICAL). A Guide to the Art of Ornamental Painting, the arrangement of Colours in Apartments, and the Principles of Decorative Design. By James W. F'acey. Crown 8vo t cloth. 2'6 *** The last two works in One handsome Vol., half-bound, entitled “House Decoration, Elementary and Practical,’’ price 510 - DECORATOR’S  ASSISTANT. A Modern Guide for Decorative Artists and Amateurs, Painters, Writers. Gilders, &c. Containing upwards of 600 Receipts, Rules, and Instructions ; with a variety of Informa- tion for General Work connected with every Class of Interior and Exterior Decorations, &c. Ninth Edition. Crown 8vo . . . . . 1/0 “ Full of receipts of value to decorators, painters, gilders, &c. The book contains the gist of larger treatises on colour and technical processes. It would be difficult to meet with a work so full of varied information on the painter’s art Building News.

8 CROSBY LOCKWOOD < S- SON'S CATALOGUE. DRAWING. Practical Rules for the Builder and Young Student in Architecture. By G. Pyne. 410 , cloth.7/6 DWELLING = HOUSES. Their Erection. Illustrated by a Perspective View, Plans, Elevations, and Sections of a Pair of Villas, with the Specification, Quantities, and Estimates. By S. H. Brooks. Crown 8vo, cloth. 2/6 EMBROIDERER’S BOOK OF DESIGN. Containing Initials, Emblems, Cyphers, Monograms, Ornamental Borders, Ecclesiastical Devices, Mediaeval and Modern Alphabets, and National Emblems. Collected by F. Delamottf, and printed in Colours. Oblong royal 8 vo, ornamental wrapper. Net  2/0 FARM BUILDINGS: Their Arrangement and Construction, with Plans and Estimates. By Professor J. Scott. Crown 8 vo, cloth 2/0 “ No one who is called upon to design farm buildings can afford to be without this work.”— Builder. FORESTRY, PRACTICAL: and its Bearing on the Improvement of Estates. By Charles E. Curtis', F.S.I., late Professor of Forestry, Field Engineering, and General Estate Management, at the College of Agriculture, Downton. Third Edition, Revised and Enlaiged. Crown 8 vo, cloth. Net 316 PREFATORY REMARKS— OBJECTS OF PLANTING — CHOICE OF A FORESTER — Choice of Soil and Site —Laying Out of Land for Plantations —Preparation of the Ground for Planting—Drainage—Planting—Distances and Distribution of Trees in Plantations—Trees and Ground Game — Attention after Planting — Thinning of plantations — Pruning of Forest Trees — Realization —Methods of Sale—Measurement of Timber — Measurement and Valuation of larch Plantation —Fire Lines—Cost of Planting — An Economic Essay on the planting of Waste lands. “Mr. Curtis has in the course of a series of short pithy chapters afforded much information of a useful and practical character on the planting and subsequent treatment of trees.”— Illustrated Carpenter and Builder. GLASS STAINING, AND PAINTING ON GLASS. From the German of Dr. Gessert and Emanuel Otto Fromberg. With an Appendix on The Art of Enamelling. Crown 8 vo, cloth . . 2/6 GRAINING AND MARBLING. See Van der Burg’s “Imitation of Woods and Marbles,’’ page 12 . HANDRAILING. A Practical Treatise showing new and Simple Methods. By Geo. Collings. Third Edition, including a Treatise on Stairbuilding. Crown 8 vo, cloth.2/6 "Of practical utility in the execution of this difficult branch of joinery.”— Builder. HEALTH OFFICER’S POCKET-BOOK. A Guide to Sanitary Practice and Law. For Medical Officers of Health, Sanitary Inspectors, Members of Sanitary Authorities, &c. By Edward F. Willoughby, M.D. (Lond.), &c. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. Fcap. 8 vo, leather. Net  10/6 “We recommend all those engaged in practical sanitary work to furnish themselves with a copy for reference .”—Sanitary Journal.

ARCHITECTURE, BUILDING, DECORATIVE ARTS, &c. g HEATING BY HOT WATER. Ventilation and Hot Water Supply. By Walter Jones, M.I.M.E. 360 pages, with 140 Illustrations. Medium 8vo, cloth .. Net 6/0 HEATING BY HOT WATER. See “Steam and Hot Water Heating and Ventilation.” HINTS TO YOUNG ARCHITECTS. By George Wight- wick, Architect, Author of “The Palace of Architecture,” &c. Sixth Edition, revised and enlarged by G. Huskisson Guillaume, Architect. Crown 8vo, cloth. 3/6 “ Ought to be considered as necessary a purchase as a box of instruments.”— Architect. HOUSE-OWNER’S ESTIMATOR; or, What ‘will it Cost to Build, Alter, or Repair? A Price Book for Unprofessional People as well as the Architectural Surveyor and Builder. By J. D. Simon. Edited by F. T. W. Miller, A.R.I.B.A. Fifth Edition, Carefully Revised. Crown 8vo, cloth. Net 3/6 “ In two years it will repay its cost a hundred times over.”— Field. HOUSE PAINTING, GRAINING, MARBLING, AND SIGN WRITING. With a Course of Elementary Drawing, and a Collection of Useful Receipts. By E. A. Davidson. Ninth Edition. Coloured Plates. Cr. 8vo, cloth. 5/0 *** The above, in cloth boards, strongly bound, 6 / 0 • “ A mass of information of use to the amateur and of value to the practical man .”—English Mechanic. HOUSE PROPERTY. A Popular and Practical Handbook to the Purchase, Tenancy, and Compulsory Sale of Houses and Land, including Dilapidations and Fixtures : with Examples of all kinds of Valuations, Information on Building and on the right use of Decorative Art. By E. L. Tarbuck, Architect and Surveyor. Seventh Edition. i2mo, cloth . . . 6/0 “The advice is thoroughly practical .”—Law Journal. "  For all who have dealings with house property, this is an indispensable guide.”— Decoration. “ Carefully brought up to date, and much improved by the addition of a division on Fine Art. A well-written and thoughtful work .”—Land Agents' Record. ILLUMINATING AND MISSAL PAINTING ON PAPER AND VELLUM. A Practical Treatise on Manuscript Work, Testimonials, and Herald Painting. With Chapters on Lettering and Writing and on Mediaeval Burnished Gold. With 2 coloured Plates. By Philip Whithard, First Class Diploma for Illuminating and Herald Painting, Printing Trades Exhibition, 1906. T56 pagts. Crown 8vo, cloth. [,Just Published. Net 4/0 ILLUMINATION, ART OF. A • Primer for the Use of Beginners, with a Rudimentary Treatise on the Art, Practical Directions for its Exercise, and Examples taken from Illuminated MSS., printed in Gold and Colours. By F. Delamotte. New and Cheaper Edition. Small 4to, ornamental boards.“/O "The examples of ancient MSS. recommended to the student, which, with much good sense, thor chooses from collections accessible to all, are selected with judgment and knowledge as

IO CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON'S CATALOGUE. JOINTS MADE AND USED BY BUILDERS. By W. J. Christy.  With 160 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo, cloth .... 3/0 LAW FOR ARCHITECTS, BUILDERS, &c. See Every Man’s Own Lawyer. A Handybook of the Principles of Law and Equity. By a Barrister. Forty-sixth (1909) Edition, Revised and Enlarged. Including Abstracts of the Legislation of 1908 of especial interest to Architects and Builders, containing also the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1906; the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1906; the Trade Disputes Act, 1906 ; the Patents and Designs Consolidation Act, 1907; the Small Holdings and Allotments Act, 1908; The Fatal Damages Accidents Act, 1908, and many other recent Acts. Large Crown 8vo, cloth, 838 pp. [Just Published . Net 6/8 “ Admirably done, admirably arranged, and admirably cheap.”— Leeds Mercury. “ A dictionary of legal facts well put together. The book is a very useful one.”— Spectator. LETTER PAINTING MADE EASY. By J. G. Badenoch. With 12 full-page Engravings of Examples. Crown 8vo, cloth . 1 / 6 “ Any intelligent lad who fails to turn out decent work after studying this system has mistaken his vocation.” —English Mechanic. LIGHT : An Introduction to the Science of Optics. Designed for the Use of Students of Architecture, Engineering,and other Applied Sciences. By E. W.Tarn,  M.A. Crown 8vo, cloth.-|/6 LIGHTNING CONDUCTORS, MODERN. An Illustrated Supplement to the Report of the Lightning Research Committee of 1905, with Notes as to the Methods of Protection, and Specifications. By Killingworth Hedges,  M.Inst.C.E., M.I.E.E., Honorary Secretary to the Lightning Research Committee, Author of “ American Street Railways.” Medium 8vo, cloth. Net 6/6 "The damage done by lightning to various buildings throughout the country is shown by sketches and photographs which make the path of the lightning clear. In the book will be found the suggestions and rules of the Research Committee, which were drawn up after a consideration of the reports on a large number of lightning strokes. These are commented on by the author, who gives also some specifications which will guide surveyors and architects in the right direction. . . . The information given in the volume is most valuable.”— Electrical Engineer. LIMES, CEMENTS, MORTARS, CONCRETES, MASTICS, PLASTERING, &c. By G. R. Burnell, C.E. Fifteenth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth.-J /6 LOCKWOOD’S BUILDER’S PRICE BOOK for 1909, A Comprehensive Handbook of the Latest Prices and Data for Builders, Architects, Engineers, and Contractors. Re-constructed, Re-written, and Greatly Enlarged. By Francis T. W. Miller. Crown 8vo. cloth. [Just Published 4/0 Latest Prices of Every Kind of Material and Latest Rates of Labour in trades Connected with Building—Tables for Valuation of Leases, Estates, f-tc.—Wages Tables— Legal Notes and Memoranda—the Form of building Contract issued by the R.I.B.A.— Full Section on Electric Lighting, by A. P. Haslam, M.I.E.E.— Full Text of New London Building Act, 1903. and acts of 1894 and 1898, with Careful Annotations on Acts now in Force—Notes of important decisions in thf. Superior Courts, by a. j. David, B.A., LL.M., of the Inner 1  emple, Barrister-at-law—By-Laws and other Regulations now in Force—An index TO the Acts and Regulations. “ An excellent book of reference.”— Architect. "Comprehensive, reliable, well arranged, legible and well bound.”— British Architect. MASONRY AND STONECUTTING. The Principles of Masonic Projection, and their Application to Construction. By E. Dobson, M.R.I.B.A. Crown 8vo, cloth. 2/6

ARCHITECTURE, BUILDING, DECORATIVE ARTS, &>c.  i MASONRY. A Practical Guide to the Art of Stone Cutting. Comprising the .Construction, Setting-Out, and Working of Stairs, Circular Work, Arches, Niches, Domes, Pendentives, Vaults, Tracery Windows, &c. ; to which are added Supplements relating to Masonry Estimating and Quantity Surveying, and to Building Stones and Marbles, and a Glossary of Terms. For. the Use of Students, Masons, and Craftsmen. By W. R. Purchase, Building Inspector to the Borough of Hove. Fifth Edition, Enlarged. Royal 8vo, 226 pp., with 52 Plates, comprising over 400 Diagrams, cloth. Net 7/6 “ The book is a practical treatise. Most of the examples given are from actual work carried out. It should be found of general utility to architectural students and others, as well as to those to whom It is specially addressed ."—Journal 0/the Royal Institute 0/British Architects. MARBLE AND MARBLE WORKING: A Handbook for Architects, Sculptors, Marble Quarry Owners and Workers, and all engaged in the Building and Decorative Industries. Containing numerous Illustrations and 13 Coloured Plates. By W. G. Ren wick, Author of “The ; Marble Industry,” “The Working of Marble for Decorative Purposes,” &c. 240 pp. Medium 8vo, cloth. [Just Published.  15/0 The Chemistry of Marble -its Geological Formation a Short Classification of Marb es—Antiquity of the Marble Industry Ancient Quarries and Methods of Working—Modern Quarries and Quarrying Methods— Machinery Used in Quarrying European and American systems Compared—marble as Building Material—Uses of marble other than for Building purposes— Sources of Production : Italian, French, Belgian, and Greek marbles, &c.  t Marbles of the United Kingdom and British Colonies—Continental Marble working—Marble working machinery—Marble working in the united states— American Machinery Described and Compared Marble working: a British Industry—Marble Substitutes and Imitations Practical Points for the.. Consideration of Architects—Hints on the Selection of marble—List of Marbles in Ordinary Use, with Descriptive Notes and Instances of Their Application. “ The book is admirably produced, the illustrations being exceptionally good, and we have i much pleasure in commending it to our readers.’’— Builder. MARBLE DECORATION. And the Terminology of British and Foreign Marbles. A Handbook for Students. By George H. Blagrove, Author of “ Shoring and its Application,” &c. With 28 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth .... . 3/6 “ Should be in the hands of every architect and builder .”—Building World. MEASURED DRAWINGS. A Portfolio issued by the School of Architecture of the University of Liverpool. To be published annually under the direction of Professor C. H. Reilly. Containing measured drawings (including detailed drawings and contours of mouldings) of notable buildings in Great Britain and Ireland, and on the Continent. Each volume will be produced in folio, with about 30 full-page plates and descriptive letterpress. Either loose in a cloth Portfolio or bound in cloth. Per Volume. Net 21 /O VOL. I. contains a complete External Survey of the following buildings witli detail drawings to a large scale:- The town Hall, Liverpool, 7  plates-The Palace of the Petit Trianon, Versailles, 5 plates —the palace of the grand Trianon, Versailles, 4 Plates—The Custom House, Dublin, 4 Plates — the Orangery, Kensington palace, 3 Plates-The Senate House, Cambridge, 3 plates-The House of Providence, Dingle Lane, Liverpool, i plate —Lodge to the House of Providence, 1 Plate—Main Doorway under Colonnade, St. Georges Hall, Liverpool, 1 Plate—Jacobean Oak Chimney Piece, Hall-i’-th’-Wood Museum, Bolion, i plate. VOL. 11. contains a complete External Survey of the following buildings, with detail drawings to a large scale :-Bank of England, Castle Street, Liverpool, 3 Plates-Bronze Internal Doors, St. George’s Hall, Liverpool, i Plaie—Si. Pauls Church, Liverpool, 5 Plates—the Queen Anne block, Greenwich Palace,8 Plates— Morden College, blackheath, 7 Plates— 1  he university library, Cambridge. 3 Plates—The Screen in the Chapel, Lincoln College, Oxpord, 2 plaies—The Palace of the Petit Trianon, Versailles, Courtyard Dei ails iPlate— , Palazzo Bevilacqua, Verona, i plate—porta Nuova, Verona, 3 Plates—Speke| Hall, Lancashire, 6  plates-Porta palio, verona, 5 Plates. , [Just Published.

12 CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON'S CATALOGUE. MEASURING AND VALUING ARTIFICERS’ WORK. A Students’ Guide containing Directions for taking Dimensions, Abstracting the same, and bringing the Quantities into Bill, with Tables of Constants for Valuation of Labour, and for the Calculation of Areas and Solidities. Originally edited by E. Dobson, Architect. With Additions by E. W. Tarn, M.A. Seventh Edition, Revised. Crown 8vo, cloth. 716 "  The most complete treatise on the principles of measuring and valuing artificers work.” —Building News. PACKING-CASE TABLES. Showing the number of Superficial Feet in Boxes or Packing-Cases, from six inches square and upwards. By W. Richardson, Timber Broker. Fourth Edition. Oblong 4to, cloth. 8/6 “ Invaluable labour-saving tables.”— Ironmonger. “ Will save much labour and calculation.”— Grocer. PAINTING. THE IMITATION of WOODS & MARBLES. As Taught and Practised by A. R. Van der Burg and P. Van der Burg, Directors of the Rotterdam Painting Institution. Royal folio, cloth, 18$ by i2$ in. Illustrated with 24 full-size Coloured Plates ; also 12 plain Plates, comprising 154 Figures. Fifth Edition. Net £1 5 s. List of Plates. 1. Various Tools Required for Wood Painting.—2, 3. Walnut; Preliminary Stages of Graining and Finished Specimen. — 4. Tools Used for Marble ’Painting and Method of Manipulation.— 5, 6. St. Remi Marble; Earlier •Operations and Finished Specimen. — 7. methods of Sketching Different Grains, Knots, &c.— 8, 9. ash: preliminary stages and Finished Specimen. —10. Methods of Sketching Marble Grains. —ii, 12. Breche Marbles : Preliminary Stages of Working and Finished Specimen.—13. Maple ; Method of Producing the Different Grains.—14, 15. Bird’s-Eye Maple; Preliminary Stages and Finished Specimen.—16. Methods of Sketching the Different Species of White Marble.—17, 18. White Marble ; Preliminary Stages of "Process and Finished Specimen —19. Mahogany; Specimens of Various Grains and Methods of Manipulation. —20, 21. Mahogany; Earlier Stages and Finished Specimen.—22, 23, 24. Sienna Marble; Varieties of Grain, Preliminary Stages and Finished Specimen—25, 26, 27. Juniper wood; Methods of Producing Grain, &c. ; Preliminary Stages and Finished Specimen.—28, 29, 30. Vert de Mer Marble; Varieties of Grain and Methods of Working, Unfinished and Finished Specimens.—31, 32, 33. Oak ; Varieties of Grain, Tools Employed AND METHODS OF MANIPULATION, PRELIMINARY STAGES AND FINISHED SPECIMEN.— 34, 35, 36. WAULSORT MARBLE; VARIETIES OF GRAIN, UNFINISHED AND FINISHED SPECIMEN “Those who desire to attain skill in the art of painting woods and marble will find advantage in consulting this book. . . , Some of the Working Men’s Clubs should give their young men the opportunity to study it.”— Builder. “Students and novices are fortunate who are able to become the possessors of so noble a work. ’’— The Architect. PAINTING POPULARLY EXPLAINED. By Thomas John Gullick, Painter, and John Timbs, F.S.A. Including Fresco, Oil, Mosaic, Water Colour, Water-Glass, Tempera, Encaustic, Miniature, Painting on Ivory, Vellum, Pottery, Enamel, Glass, &c. Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 5/Q *** Adopted as a Prize Book at South Kensington. “ Much may be learned, even by those who fancy they do not require to be taught, from the ■careful perusal of this unpretending but comprehensive treatise .”—Art 'Journal. PLASTERING. A Practical Compendium of Plain and Ornamental Plaster Work. By W. Kemp. Crown 8vo, cloth . . . 2/0 PLUMBING, STEAM AND HOT WATER HEATING. A Modirn Work for the Plumber, the Heating Engineer, the Architect, and the Builder. By J. J. Lawler. With 284 Illustrations. 4to, cloth. Net Q.'MQ PLUMBING : A Text-Book to the Practice of the Art or Craft of P* um b er - With Chapters upon House Drainage and Ventilation. By Wm. Paton Buchan. Ninth Edition, with 512 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, doth. . .. ;u text "hook winch may be safely put into the hands of every young plumber, and which Will also be found useful by architects and medical professors.”— Builder.

ARCHITECTURE, BUILDING, DECORATIVE ARTS, &c.  15 PORTLAND CEMENT FOR USERS. By the late Henry Faija, M.Inst.C.E. Fifth Edition. Revised and Enlarged by D. B. Butler, A.M.Inst.C.E. Crown 8vo, cloth. 3 /C QUANTITIES AND MEASUREMENTS. In Bricklayers’, Masons’, Plasterers’, Plumbers’, Painters’, Paperhangers’, Gilders’, Smiths’, Carpenters’ and Joiners’ Work. By A. C. Beaton, Surveyor. Crown 8vo, cloth.1 /3 “ This book is indispensable to builders and their quantity clerks.”— English Mechanic. REINFORCED CONCRETE. A Handbook for Architects, Engineers and Contractors. By F. D. Warren, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, with Illustrations, 271 pages. Crown 8vo, cloth. Net  1 0 6 Extract from Preface.  y The book is divided into four parts. Part I. gives a general but concise resume’ of the subject from a practical standpoint, bringing out some of the difficulties met with in practice and suggesting remedies. Under Part II. is compiled a series of tests justifying the use of various constants and co-efficients in preparing the tables under Part III. Part III. contains a series of Tables from which it is liopqd the designer may obtain all necessary information to meet the more common cases in practice. Part IV. treats of the design of trussed roofs from a practical standpoint. REINFORCED CONCRETE DESIGN. A Graphical Handbook by John Hawkesworth, C.E., consisting of a series of Plates showing graphically, by means of plotted curves, the required design for Slabs, Beams and Columns, under various conditions of external loading, together with practical examples explaining the method of using each Plate. With an Appendix containing the requirements of the Building. Code of New York City in regard to Reinforced Concrete. 64 Pages. 15 full page Plates. 4to, cloth. Net 1 2/0 EIST OF PLATES.—I. VALUES OF CONSTANT (K) FOR DETERMINING RESISTING] Moments— II. & III. design of Slabs Under Various conditions of Design and Number of Square bars Required— IX. Location of the Neutral Axis—x Shfaring Resistance of Various Combinations of Concrete and steel— XI. Square columns Designed in accordance with the New York building Code— XII & xila Rectangular columns with Various Unit stresses and Round Rods Required for a Given Area of metal Cross Section— XIII. Hoofed Columns with Six Longitudinals-XIV. Hooped Columns with Eight Longitudinals- XV Complete design of a Reinforced Concrete structure. APPLNDIX. — Preliminary hypotheses — Rectangular Members unde Transverse Loading—t-Beams, with neutral Axis below the Boi iom of the. Slab—Members Subjf:ctf;d to Direct compression—Hooped Columns—regulations of the New York Building Code. | REINFORCED CONCRETE DIAGRAMS for the Calculation of Beams, Slabs and Columns in Reinforced Concrete. By G. S. Coleman, A.M.Inst.C.E. Royal 4to, cloth . . . [Just published. Net 3/6 ROOF CARPENTRY. Practical Lessons in the Framing of^ Wood Roofs. For the use of Working Carpenters. By Geo. CollingsJ Crown 8vo, cloth. 2/0 SANITARY WORK IN SMALL TOWNS AND VILLAGES. By Charles Slagg, A.M.Inst.C.E. Third Edition, Enlarged. Crown| “ There is a great deal of work required to be done in the smaller towns and villages and this little volume will help those who are willing to do it ."—Builder. SAW MILLS. Their Arrangement and Management, and the) Economical Conversion of Timber. By M. Powis Bale, M.Inst.CK! Third Edition, Revised. Crown 8vo. cloth . . • • lO/C| •• The administration  of a large sawing estaLlishment is discussed, and the from a financial standpoint. Hence the size, shape, order, and disposition of saw mi Us and toe UM are gone into in detail, and the course of the timber is traced from its reception to its delivery in its] converted state. We could not desire a more complete or practical treatise. —Butiatr

CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON'S CATALOGUE. SEWAGE, PURIFICATION OF: being a Brief Account of the Scientific Principles of Sewage Purification, and their Practical Application. By Sidney Barwise, M.D. (Lond.), B.Sc., M.R.C.S., D.P.H. (Camb.), Fellow of the Sanitary Institute. Medical Officer of Health to the Derbyshire County Council. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged, with an Appendix on the Analysis of Sewage and Sewage Effluents. With numerous Illustrations and Diagra ns. Demy 8vo, cloth . .... Net 10/6 SUMMARY OF CONTENTS: —SEWAGE : ITS NATURE AND COMPOSITION — THE CHEMISTRY OF SEWAGE — VARIETIES OF SEWAGE AND THE CHANGES IT UNDERGOES— River Pollution and its Effects — The Land Treatment of Sewage—Precipitation, precipitants, and Tanks—The Liquefaction of Sewage — Principles involved in the Oxidation of Sewage — Artificial Processes of Purification- Automatic Distributors and Special Filters —Particulars of Sewerage and Sewage Disposal Schemes required by Local Government Board— Useful DATA — Apftendix ;  THE APPARATUS REQUIRED FOR SEWAGE ANALYSIS — STANDARD Solutions used in the Method of sewage Analysis— Tables ; Estimation of Ammonia—Nitrogen as Nitrates — Incubator Test, Oxygen Absorbed—To Convert Grains per gallon to Parts per ioo.ooo. SHORING, and its Application. By G, H. Blagrove.  Crown 8vo, cloth ..1/6 SPECIFICATIONS IN DETAIL. By Frank W. Macey, Architect, Author of Conditions of Contract." Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged, containing 644 pp., and 2,000 Illustrations. Royal 8vo, cloth Net 21/0 General Notes—Specification of works and List of General Conditions — Preliminary items (including Shoring and House Breaker)— Drainage (including Rain-water Weil and Reports)—Excavator (including Concrete Ft oors, roofs. Stairs and walls) — Pavior—Bricklayer (including Flintwork, River and other Walling. Spring-water wells, Storage Tanks, Fountains, Filters, Terra Cotta and Faience) — Mason—Carpenter, Toiner and Ironmonger (including Fencing and Piling)— smith and Founder (including Heating, F’re Hydrants, Stable and Cow-house Fittings— (Slater (including Slate m ason) — Tiler _ Stone Tiler _ shingler — Thatcher — Plumber (including Hot-water work) — Zincworker — Coppersmith — PLASTERER — GASFITTER — BELLHANGER —GLAZIER — PAINTER — P A PERH ANGER — General Repairs and alterations —Ventilation— road-making — Electric Light—Index. “We strongly advise every student to purchase the volume and carefully study it, while to the older practitioner we would say, have it by you as a most useful work of reference .”—Architectural Association Notes . SPECIFICATIONS FOR PRACTICAL ARCHITECTURE. A Guide to the Architect, Engineer. Surveyor, and Builder. Upon the Basis ofthe Work by A. Bartholomew.  Revised, by K Rogers.  8vo, cloth 15/0 “ One of the books with which everv young architect must be equipped .Architect STEAM AND HOT WATER HEATING AND VRNTILA- I TION. A Modern Work on Steam and Hot Water Heating and Ventilation, I with Descriptions and Data of all Materials and Appliances used in the I Construction of such Apparatus. Rules. Tables, &c. By A. G. King. 400 I pages, over 300 illustrations. Demy 8vo, cloth [Just Published. Net 1 2/6 I Introduction — Heat — Evolution of Artificial Heating Apparatus — [Boiler Surfaces and Settings—The Chimney Flue—Pipe and Fitting-—Valves— [Forms of Radiating surfaces—Locating of Radiating Surfaces—Estimating |Radiation—Steam-heating Apparatus —Exhaust-Steam Heating —Ho r -water [Heating — pressure Systems of hot-water Work—hot-water Appliances— [Greenhouse Heating — Vacuum Vapour and Vacuum Exhaust Heating — [Miscellaneous Heating—Radiator and pipe Connections-ventilation—mechanical Ventilation and Hot-blast Heating—Steam Appliances—District Heating [—Pipe and boiler Covering — Temperature Regulation and Heat Control [—Business Methods—Miscellaneous—Rules, Tables and Useful Information. [superficial measurement.  Tables calculated from I 1 to 2oo inches in length, by 1 to 108 inches in breadth. A Guide for the use I of Architects, Surveyors, Engineers, Timber Merchants, Builders, &c. By I J. Hawkings. Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth .... 3/6 I , “ These tables will be ’onnd of great assistance to all who require to make calculations ■of supeirficai measurement .”—English Mechanic

ARCHITECTURE, BUILDING, DECORATIVE ARTS, &c.  15 TECHNICAL GUIDE, MEASURER, AND ESTIMATOR. For Builders and Surveyors. Containing Technical Directions for Measuring Work in all the Building Trades, Complete Specifications for Houses, Roads, and Drains, and an Easy Method of Estimating the parts of a Building collectively. By A. C. Beaton. Tenth Edition. Waistcoat-pocket size. 1/6 " No builder, architect, surveyor, or valuer should be without his 1  Beaton.’ ’— Building News. TIMBER IMPORTER’S, TIMBER MERCHANT’S, AND BUILDER’S STANDARD GUIDE. By R. E. Grandy.  Crown 8vo, cloth. 2/0 TIMBER MERCHANT’S and BUILDER’S COMPANION. Containing New and Copious Tables of the Reduced Weight and Measurement of Deals and Battens, of all sizes, and other Useful Tables for the use of Timber Merchants and Builders. By William Dowsing. Fifth Edition, Revised and Corrected. Crown 8vo, cloth. 3/0 “We are glad to see these admirable tables, which for correctness and simplicity of arrangement leave nothing to be desired.”— Timber Trades Journal, TIMBER MERCHANT. Being a Practical Guide for the Use of Building Contractors, Surveyors, Builders, &c., comprising useful Tables for all purposes connected with the Timber Trade, Marks of Wood, Essay on the Strength of Timber, Remarks on the Growth of Timber, &c. By W. Richardson. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo, cloth .... 3/6 VENTILATION. A Text-Book to the Practice of the Art of Ventilating Buildings. By W. P. Buchan. With 170 illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth. 3/6 VENTILATION. See “Steam and Hot Water Heating and Ventilation.” VILLA ARCHITECTURE. A Handy Book containing _ a Series of Designs for Villa Residences in various Styles. With Outline Specifications and Estimates. By C. Wickes, Architect, Author of “The Spires and Towers of England,” &c. 61 Plates, 4to, half-morocco, gilt edges.£1 11s. 6o, WATER AND ITS PURIFICATION. A Handbook for the Use of Local Authorities, Sanitary Officers, and others interested in Water- Supply. By S. Rideal, D.Sc.  Lond., F.I.C. Second Edition, Revised, with Additions, including numerous Illustrations and Tables. Large Crown 8vo, cloth ............ Net 0/0 WATER SUPPLY OF CITIES AND TOWNS. By William Humber, A.M.Inst.C.E., and M.Inst.M.E., Author of “Cast and Wrought Iron Bridge Construction,” &c., &c. Illustrated with 50 Double Plates, 1 Single Plate, Coloured Frontispiece, and upwards of 250 Woodcuts, and containing 400 pp. of Text. Imperial 4to, elegantly and substantially half-bound in morocco . . £6 6s. I. Historical sketch of some of the means that have been adopted for THE SUPPLY OF WATER TO CITIES AND TOWNS—II. WATER AND THE FOREIGN MATTER USUALLY ASSOCIATED WITH IT—III. RAINFALL AND EVAPORATION—IV. SPRINGS AND THE WATER-BEARING FORMATIONS OF VARIOUS DISTRICTS—V. MEASUREMENT AND estimation of the Flow of *ater-VI. On the selection of the Source of Supply—VII WELLS—VIII. Reservoirs—IX. The Purification of Watep— X. Pumps -XI. Pumping Machinery—XII. Conduits—XIII. Distribution of Water —XIV. Meters, Service Pipes, and House Fittings—XV. the Law and Economv of Water works—XVI. Constant and Intermittent Supply—XVII. Description of plates—Appendices, giving Tables of Rates of Supply, Velocities &c &c., together with Specifications of Several Works Illustrat ed, among which WILL BE FOUND: ABERDEEN, BIDEFORD, CANTERBURY, DUNDEE. HALIFAX, LAMBETH, Rotherham, and others. “ The most systematic and valuable work upon water supp’y hitherto produce 1 in English, or in any other language. Mr Humber’s work is characterised almost throug out by an exhaustiveness much more distinctive of French and German than of English technical treatises.” —Engineer.

i6 CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON’S CATALOGUE . WATER SUPPLY OF TOWNS AND THE CONSTRUC- TION OF WATER "WORKS. A Practical Treatise for the use of Engineers and Students of Engineering. By W. K. Burton, A. M. Inst. C.E., Consulting Engineer to. the Tokyo Waterworks. Third Edition, Revised. Edited by Allan Greenwell, F.G.S., A.M.Inst.C.E. With numerous Plates and Illustrations. Super-royal 8vo, buckram. £1 5 s. I. INTRODUCTORY— II. DIFFERENT QUALITIES OF WATER— III. QUANTITY OF WATER TO BE PROVIDED—IV. ON ASCERTAINING WHETHER A PROPOSED SOURCE OF Supply is Sufficient—V. On Estimating the Storage Capacity Required to be provided— VI. Classification of waterworks— VII. Impounding Reservoirs— VIII. Earthwork dams— IX. Masonry dams— X. The Purification of Water— XI. Settling Reservoirs— XII. Sand Filtration— XIII. Purification of Water by Action of Iron, Softening of water by Action ok Lime, Natural Filtration— XIV. service or Clean water Reservoirs—Water towers—stand pipes— XV. the connection of Settling Reservoirs, Filter beds, and Service Reservoirs —XVI. pumping Machinery— XVII. Flow of Water in Conduits—Pipes and open Channels — XVIII. distributing Systems xix. Special Provisions for the Hxtinction of Firhs-XX. Pipes for waterworks— XXI. prevention of waste of Water— XXII. Various Appliances used in Connection with Waterworks. Appendix I. By Prof. John Milne, F.R.S.— Considerations Concerning the Probable Effects of Earthquakes on Waterworks and the special Precautions to be taken in Earthquake Countries. appendix II. By John De Rijke, C.E. On Sand Dunes and Dune Sands as a Source of Water Supply. “We congratulate the author upon the practical commonsense shown in the preparation ot this work. . . . The plates and diagrams have evidently been prepared with great care, and cannot fail to be of great assistance to the student.' 1 — Builder. WATER SUPPLY, RURAL. A Practical Handbook on the Supply of Water and Construction of Waterworks for Small Country Districts. By Allan Greenwell, A.M.I.C.E., and W. T. Curry, A.M.I.C.E. Revised Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth . . . . 5/Q WATER ENGINEERING. A Practical Treatise on the Measurement, Storage, Conveyance, and Utilisation of Water for the Supply of Towns. By C. Slagg, A.M.Inst.C.E. 7/g WOOD-CARVING FOR AMATEURS. With Hints on Design. By A Lady. With 10 Plates. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, in emblematic wrapper. 2/0 “ The handicraft of the wood-carver, so well as a book “can impart it, may be learnt from ‘ A Ladys publication. "—Athenceum. WOODWORKING MACHINERY. Its Rise, Progress, and Construction. With Hints on the Management of Saw Mills and the Economical Conversion of Timber. Illustrated with Examples of Recent Designs by leading English, French, and American Engineers. By M. Powis Bale, M.Inst.C.E., M.I.Mech.E. Second Edition, Revised, with large Additions, large crown 8vo, 440 pp., cloth. 9/0 ^ r \ Bale „ ls  evidently an expert on the subject, and he has collected so much Information tnat ms book is all-sufficient for builders and others engaged in the conversion of timber."— Architect. BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO. LD., LONDON AND TONBRIDGE. (157. 2I-4-09.)

WEALE'S SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL SERIES. MATHEMATICS, ARITHMETIC, &c. Geometry, Descriptive. J. F. Heather . . .2/- Practical Plane Geometry. J. F. Heather. . . 2/- Analytical Geometry. J. Hann & J. R. Young. . 2/- Geometry. Part I. (Euclid, Bks. I.—III.) H. Law  1/6 Part II. (Euclid, Books IV„ V., VI., XI., XII.). H. Law.1/6 Geometry, in 1 vol. (Euclid’s Elements) . . . . 2/6 Plane Trigonometry. J. Hann . . . .1/6 Spherical Trigonometry. J. Hann . . . . 1/— The above 2 vols., bound together ....  2/6 Differential Calculus. W. S. B. Woolhouse . . 1/6 Integral Calculus. H. Cox.1/6 Algebra. J. Haddon.2/- Key to ditto.1/6 Book-keeping. J. Haddon.1/6 Arithmetic. J. R. Young.1/6 Key to ditto.1/6 Equational Arithmetic. W. Hipsley . . . . 1/6 Arithmetic. J. Haddon.1/6 Mathematical Instruments. Heather k  Walmisley 2/- Drawing & Measuring Instruments. J. F. Heather  1/6 Optical Instruments. J. F. Heather . . .1/6 Surveying & Astronomical Instruments. J. F. Heather.!/6 The above 3 vols., bound together . . . .4/6 Mensuration and Measuring. T. Baker . . . 1/6 Slide Rule, & How to Use it. C. Hoare . . 2/6 Measures, Weights, & Moneys. W. S. B. Woolhouse  2/6 Logarithms, Treatise on, with Tables. H. Law . 3/- Compound Interest and Annuities. F. Thoman . 4/- Compendious Calculator. D. O’Gorman . . 2/6 Mathematics. F. Campin. 3 l~ Astronomy. R. Main & W. T. Lynn . 2 /~ Statics and Dynamics. T. Baker . . . . 1/6 Superficial Measurement. J. Hawkings . . 3 / 6 CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON, 7, Stationers’ Hall Court, E.C

WEALE’S SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL SERIES. BUILDING & ARCHITECTURE. Building Estates. F. Maitland . . . . 2/- Science of Building. E. W. Tarn . . . . 3/6 Building, Art of. E. Dobson  and J. P. Allen . . 2/- Book on Building. Sir E. Beckett . . . . 4/6 Dwelling Houses, Erection of. S. H. Brooks . 2/6 Cottage Building. C. B. Allen.2/- Acoustics of Public Buildings. Prof. T. R. Smith.  1/6 Practical Bricklaying. A. Hammond . . . . 1/6 Practical Brick Cutting & Setting. A. Hammond. 1/6 Brickwork, F. Walker.1/6 Brick and Tile Making. E. Dobson. . . .3/- Practical Brick & Tile Book. Dobson & Hammond  6/- Carpentry and Joinery. T. Tredgold & E. W. Tarn 3/6 Atlas of 35 plates to the above.6/- Handrailing, and Staircasing. G. Collings . .2/6 Circular Work in Carpentry. G. Collings . . 2/6 Roof Carpentry. G. Collings . . . . .2/- Construction of Roofs. E. W. Tarn . . . . 1/6 Joints used by Builders. J. W. Christy . . 3/- Shoring. G. H. Blagrove.1/6 Timber Importer’s & Builder’s Guide. R. E. Grandy  2/- Plumbing. W. P. Buchan . . . ... 3/6 Ventilation of Buildings. W. P. Buchan . . 3/6 Practical Plasterer. W. Kemp . . ... 2 /- House-Painting. E. A. Davidson . . . .5/- Elementary Decoration. J. W. Facey . . . . 2/- Practical House Decoration. J. W. Facey . . 2/6 Gas-Fitting. J. Black.2/6 Portland Cement for Users. H. Faija & D. B. Butler  3/- Limes, Cements, & Mortars. G. R. Burnell . .  1/6 Masonry and Stone Cutting. E. Dobson . . 2/6 Arches, Piers, and Buttresses. W. Bland . .  1/6 Quantities and Measurements. A. C. Beaton .  1/6 Complete Measurer. R. Horton . . . . 4/- Superficial Measurement. J. Hawkings . . 3/6 Light, for use of Architects. E. W. Tarn . . 1/6 Hints to Young Architects. WightwickA Guillaume  3/6 Dictionary of Architectural Terms. J. Weals 5/- CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON, 7, Stationers’ Hall Court, E.C.

> ; "H" :) t WEALE’S SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL SERIES. BUILDING & ARCHITECTURE— eontd. Architecture, Orders. W. H. Leeds . Architecture, Styles. T. T. Bury The above 2 vols., bound together Architecture, Design. E. L. Garbett The above 3 vols., bound together Architectural Modelling. T. A. Richardson . Vitruvius’ Architecture. J. Gwilt Grecian Architecture. Lord Aberdeen . The above 2 vols., bound together 1/6 2/- 3/6 2/6 61 - 1/6 slit FINE ARTS. Dictionary of Painters. P. Daryl . . . . 2/6 Painting, Fine Art. T. J. Gullick & J. Timbs . . 5/- Grammar of Colouring. G. Field & E. A. Davidson 3/- Perspective. G. Pyne. 2/- Glass Staining & Painting on Glass . . . . 2/6 Music. C. C. Spencer. 2/6 Pianoforte Instruction. C. C. Spencer . . . 1/6 INDUSTRIAL & USEFUL ARTS. Cements, Pastes, Glues, & Gums. H. C. Standage 2/- Clocks, Watches, and Bells. Lord Grimthorpe . 4/6 Goldsmith’s Handbook. G. E. Gee . . . . 3/- Silversmith’s Handbook. G. E. Gee . . .3/- Goldsmith’s & Silversmith’s Handbook. G. E. Gee 7/- Hall-Marking of Jewellery. G. E. Gee . . . 3/- Cabinet-Maker’s Guide. R. Bitmead . . .2/6 Practical Organ Building. W. E. Dickson . . 2/6 Coach Building. J. W. Burgess . . . .2/6 Brass Founder’s Manual. W. Graham . . . 2/- French Polishing and Enamelling. R. Bitmead . 1/6 House Decoration. J. W. Facey.5/- Letter-Painting Made Easy. J. G. Badenoch . . 1/6 Boot and Shoemaking. J. B. Leno . . . . 2/- Mechanical Dentistry. C. Hunter . . . - 3 h Wood Engraving. W. N. Brown.1/6 Laundry Management.2/- CROSBY LOCKWOOD & SON, 7, Stationers’ Hall Court, E.C.